URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nineteen_Eighty-Four
Content:

Dystopian
political fiction
social science fiction
Nineteen Eighty-Four (also published as 1984) is a dystopian novel by the English writer George Orwell. It was published on 8 June 1949 by Secker & Warburg as Orwell's ninth and final completed book. Thematically, it centres on the consequences of totalitarianism, mass surveillance and repressive regimentation of people and behaviours within society.[3][4] Orwell, a democratic socialist and an anti-Stalinist, modelled an authoritarian socialist Britain on the Soviet Union in the era of Stalinism and the practices of censorship and propaganda in Nazi Germany.[5] More broadly, the novel examines the role of truth and facts within societies and the ways in which they can be manipulated.
The story takes place in an imagined future. The current year is uncertain, but believed to be 1984. Much of the world is in perpetual war. Great Britain, now known as Airstrip One, has become a province of the totalitarian superstate Oceania, which is led by Big Brother, a dictatorial leader supported by an intense cult of personality manufactured by the Party's Thought Police. The Party engages in omnipresent government surveillance and, through the Ministry of Truth, historical negationism and constant propaganda to persecute individuality and independent thinking.[6]
Nineteen Eighty-Four has become a classic literary example of political and dystopian fiction. It also popularised the term "Orwellian" as an adjective, with many terms used in the novel entering common usage, including "Big Brother", "doublethink", "Thought Police", "thoughtcrime", "Newspeak" and the expression that "2 + 2 = 5". Parallels have been drawn between the novel's subject-matter and real life instances of totalitarianism, mass surveillance, and violations of freedom of expression, among other themes.[7][8][9] Orwell described his book as a "satire",[10] and a display of the "perversions to which a centralised economy is liable", while also stating he believed "that something resembling it could arrive".[10] Time magazine included it on its list of the 100 best English-language novels published from 1923 to 2005,[11] and it was placed on the Modern Library's 100 Best Novels list, reaching number 13 on the editors' list and number 6 on the readers' list.[12] In 2003, it was listed at number eight on The Big Read survey by the BBC.[13] It has been adapted across media since its publication, most famously as a film released in 1984, starring John Hurt, Suzanna Hamilton and Richard Burton.


## Plot
As the narrative opens on "April 4th, 1984", a date whose validity is questioned by the protagonist, the world has been ravaged for decades by global war, civil conflict, and revolution. What was formerly known as the island of Great Britain is "Airstrip One", a province of Oceania, one of the three totalitarian super-states that rule the world. It is ruled by "The Party" under the ideology of "Ingsoc": a Newspeak shortening of "English Socialism". Also present is the mysterious leader Big Brother, who has an intense cult of personality. The Party brutally purges out anyone who does not fully conform to their regime, using the Thought Police and constant surveillance through telescreens (two-way televisions), cameras and hidden microphones. Those who fall out of favour with the Party become "unpersons", disappearing per damnatio memoriae with all evidence of their existence destroyed.
In London Winston Smith is a member of the Outer Party, working at the Ministry of Truth, where he rewrites historical records to conform to the state's ever-changing version of history. Winston revises past editions of The Times, while the original documents are destroyed after being dropped into ducts known as memory holes, which lead to an immense furnace. He secretly opposes the Party's rule and dreams of rebellion, despite knowing that he is already a "thought-criminal" and is likely to be caught one day.
While in a prole neighbourhood he meets Mr Charrington, the owner of an antiques shop, and buys a diary where he writes criticisms of the Party and Big Brother. To his dismay, when he visits a prole quarter he discovers they have no political consciousness. As he works in the Ministry of Truth, he observes Julia, a young woman maintaining the novel-writing machines at the ministry, whom Winston suspects of being a spy, and develops an intense hatred of her. He vaguely suspects that O'Brien, a member of the Inner Party and a superior of his, is part of an enigmatic underground resistance movement known as the Brotherhood, formed by Big Brother's reviled political rival, Emmanuel Goldstein.
One day Julia discreetly hands Winston a love note, and the two begin a secret affair. Julia explains that she also loathes the Party, but Winston observes that she is politically apathetic and uninterested in overthrowing the regime. Initially meeting in the country, they later meet in a rented room above Mr Charrington's shop. During the affair, Winston remembers the disappearance of his family during the civil war of the 1950s and his tense relationship with his estranged wife Katharine. Weeks later, O'Brien invites Winston to his flat, where he introduces himself as a member of the Brotherhood and sends Winston a copy of The Theory and Practice of Oligarchical Collectivism by Goldstein. Meanwhile, during the nation's Hate Week, Oceania's enemy suddenly changes from Eurasia to Eastasia, which goes mostly unnoticed. Winston is recalled to the Ministry to help make the necessary revisions to the records. Winston and Julia read parts of Goldstein's book, which explains how the Party maintains power, the true meanings of its slogans, and the concept of perpetual war. It argues that the Party can be overthrown if proles rise up against it. However, Winston never gets the opportunity to read the chapter that explains why the Party took power and is motivated to maintain it.
Winston and Julia are captured when Mr Charrington is revealed to be an undercover Thought Police agent, and they are separated and imprisoned at the Ministry of Love. O'Brien also reveals himself to be a member of the Thought Police and a member of a false flag operation which catches political dissidents of the Party. Over several months, Winston is starved and relentlessly tortured to bring his beliefs in line with the Party. O'Brien tells Winston that he will never know whether the Brotherhood actually exists and that Goldstein's book was written collaboratively by him and other Party members; furthermore, O'Brien reveals to Winston that the Party sees power not as a means but as an end, and the ultimate purpose of the Party is seeking power entirely for its own sake. For the final stage of re-education, O'Brien takes Winston to Room 101, which contains each prisoner's worst fear. When confronted with rats, Winston denounces Julia and pledges allegiance to the Party.
Winston is released into public life and continues to frequent the Chestnut Tree café. He encounters Julia, and both reveal that they have betrayed the other and are no longer in love. Back in the café, a news alert celebrates Oceania's supposed massive victory over Eurasian armies in Africa. Winston finally accepts that he loves Big Brother.


### Epilogue
The novel includes an epilogue, an appendix of around 1,000 words, titled Principles of Newspeak, and written in the voice of the (or possibly a second) narrator,[14][15] using counterfactual past-subjunctive tense.[15] It is referred to in a footnote to the book's seventh paragraph.[14][15] Some critics read it as implying the collapse of The Party some time after the year 1984, describing it as a "happy ending".[14] It refers to Newspeak as having failed to become dominant.[14]
Orwell wrote to his literary agent in 1949, urging that the appendix be retained for the American edition.[15]


## Characters


### Main characters
Winston Smith: the 39-year-old protagonist who is a phlegmatic everyman harbouring thoughts of rebellion and is curious about the Party's power and the past before the Revolution.
Julia: Winston's lover, who publicly espouses Party doctrine as a member of the fanatical Junior Anti-Sex League. Julia enjoys her small acts of rebellion and has no interest in giving up her lifestyle.
O'Brien: an Inner Party official who is secretly a member of the Thought Police. He poses as a member of the Brotherhood, the counter-revolutionary resistance, to catch Winston.
Big Brother and Emmanuel Goldstein never physically appear, but are important to the plot and have a significant role in the worldbuilding. Big Brother: the leader and figurehead of the Party that rules Oceania. A deep cult of personality is formed around him. It is not revealed whether he really exists. Emmanuel Goldstein: ostensibly a former leading figure in the Party who became the counter-revolutionary leader of the Brotherhood, and author of the book The Theory and Practice of Oligarchical Collectivism. Goldstein is the symbolic enemy of the state—the national nemesis who ideologically unites the people of Oceania with the Party, especially during the Two Minutes Hate and other forms of fear-mongering. However, O'Brien claims that the book was actually written by the Party.
Big Brother: the leader and figurehead of the Party that rules Oceania. A deep cult of personality is formed around him. It is not revealed whether he really exists.
Emmanuel Goldstein: ostensibly a former leading figure in the Party who became the counter-revolutionary leader of the Brotherhood, and author of the book The Theory and Practice of Oligarchical Collectivism. Goldstein is the symbolic enemy of the state—the national nemesis who ideologically unites the people of Oceania with the Party, especially during the Two Minutes Hate and other forms of fear-mongering. However, O'Brien claims that the book was actually written by the Party.


### Secondary characters
Aaronson, Jones and Rutherford: former members of the Inner Party whom Winston vaguely remembers as among the original leaders of the Revolution, long before he had heard of Big Brother. They confessed to treasonable conspiracies with foreign powers and were then executed in the political purges of the 1960s. In between their confessions and executions, Winston saw them drinking in the Chestnut Tree Café—with broken noses, suggesting that their confessions had been obtained by torture. Later, in the course of his editorial work, Winston sees newspaper evidence contradicting their confessions, but drops it into a memory hole. Eleven years later, he is confronted with the same photograph during his interrogation.
Ampleforth: Winston's one-time Records Department colleague who was imprisoned for leaving the word "God" in a poem by Rudyard Kipling as he could not find another rhyme for "rod";[17] Winston encounters him at the Ministry of Love. Ampleforth is a dreamer and intellectual who takes pleasure in his work, and respects poetry and language, traits which cause him disfavour with the Party.
Mr Charrington: an undercover officer of the Thought Police masquerading as a kind and sympathetic antiques dealer among the proles.
Katharine Smith: the emotionally indifferent wife whom Winston "can't get rid of". Despite disliking sexual intercourse, Katharine married Winston because it was their "duty to the Party". Although she was a "goodthinkful" ideologue, they separated because the couple could not conceive children. Divorce is not permitted, but couples who cannot have children may live separately. For much of the story Winston lives in vague hope that Katharine may die or could be "got rid of" so that he may marry Julia. He regrets not having killed her by pushing her over the edge of a quarry when he had the chance many years previously.
The Parsons family: Tom Parsons: Winston's naïve neighbour, and an ideal member of the Outer Party: an uneducated, suggestible man who is utterly loyal to the Party, and fully believes in its perfect image. He is socially active and participates in the Party activities for his social class. He is friendly towards Smith, and despite his political conformity punishes his bullying son for firing a catapult at Winston. Later, as a prisoner, Winston sees Parsons imprisoned in the Ministry of Love, after his young daughter reported him to the Thought Police for speaking against Big Brother in his sleep. Even this does not dampen Parsons's belief in the Party—he says he could do "good work" in the hard labour camps. Mrs Parsons: Parsons's wife is a wan and hapless woman who is intimidated by her own children. The Parsons children: a nine-year-old son and seven-year-old daughter. Both are members of the Spies, a youth organisation that focuses on indoctrinating children with Party ideals and training them to report any suspected incidents of unorthodoxy. They represent the new generation of Oceanian citizens, the model society envisioned by the Inner Party without memory of life before Big Brother, and without family ties or emotional sentiment.
Tom Parsons: Winston's naïve neighbour, and an ideal member of the Outer Party: an uneducated, suggestible man who is utterly loyal to the Party, and fully believes in its perfect image. He is socially active and participates in the Party activities for his social class. He is friendly towards Smith, and despite his political conformity punishes his bullying son for firing a catapult at Winston. Later, as a prisoner, Winston sees Parsons imprisoned in the Ministry of Love, after his young daughter reported him to the Thought Police for speaking against Big Brother in his sleep. Even this does not dampen Parsons's belief in the Party—he says he could do "good work" in the hard labour camps.
Mrs Parsons: Parsons's wife is a wan and hapless woman who is intimidated by her own children.
The Parsons children: a nine-year-old son and seven-year-old daughter. Both are members of the Spies, a youth organisation that focuses on indoctrinating children with Party ideals and training them to report any suspected incidents of unorthodoxy. They represent the new generation of Oceanian citizens, the model society envisioned by the Inner Party without memory of life before Big Brother, and without family ties or emotional sentiment.
Syme: Winston's colleague at the Ministry of Truth, a lexicographer involved in compiling a new edition of the Newspeak dictionary. Although he is enthusiastic about his work and support for the Party, Winston notes, "He is too intelligent. He sees too clearly and speaks too plainly." Winston predicts, correctly, that Syme will become an unperson.


## Writing and publication


### Idea
The Orwell Archive at University College London contains undated notes about ideas that evolved into Nineteen Eighty-Four. The notebooks have been deemed "unlikely to have been completed later than January 1944", and "there is a strong suspicion that some of the material in them dates back to the early part of the war".[18]
In one letter from 1948 Orwell claims to have "first thought of [the book] in 1943", while in another he says he thought of it in 1944 and cites the Tehran Conference in 1943 as inspiration: "What it is really meant to do is to discuss the implications of dividing the world up into 'Zones of Influence' (I thought of it in 1944 as a result of the Tehran Conference), and in addition to indicate by parodying them the intellectual implications of totalitarianism".[18] Orwell had toured Austria in May 1945 and observed manoeuvring he thought would probably lead to separate Soviet and Allied Zones of Occupation.[19][20]
In January 1944 the Russian literary historian Gleb Struve introduced Orwell to Yevgeny Zamyatin's 1924 dystopian novel, We. In his response Orwell expressed an interest in the genre, and informed Struve that he had begun writing ideas for one of his own, "that may get written sooner or later".[21][22] In 1946 Orwell wrote about the 1931 dystopian novel Brave New World by Aldous Huxley in his article "Freedom and Happiness" for the Tribune, and noted similarities to We.[21] By this time Orwell had scored a critical and commercial hit with his 1945 political satire, Animal Farm, which raised his profile. For a follow-up he decided to produce a dystopian work of his own.[23][24]


### Writing
In a June 1944 meeting with Fredric Warburg, co-founder of his British publisher Secker & Warburg, shortly before the release of Animal Farm, Orwell announced that he had written the first 12 pages of his new novel. As he could then only earn a living from journalism, he predicted the book would not see a release before 1947.[22] Progress was slow; by the end of September 1945 Orwell had written some 50 pages.[25] Orwell became disenchanted with the restrictions and pressures involved with journalism and grew to detest city life in London.[26] He suffered from bronchiectasis and a lesion in one lung; the harsh winter worsened his health.[27]
In May 1946 Orwell arrived on the Scottish island of Jura.[24] He had wanted to retreat to a Hebridean island for several years; David Astor recommended he should stay at Barnhill, a remote farmhouse on the island that his family owned,[28] with no electricity or hot water. Here Orwell intermittently drafted and finished Nineteen Eighty-Four.[24] His first stay lasted till October 1946, and during it he made little progress on the few already completed pages, and for a period of three months he did not work on it at all.[29] After spending the winter in London, Orwell returned to Jura; in May 1947 he reported to Warburg that despite progress being slow and difficult, he was roughly a third of the way through.[30] He sent his "ghastly mess" of a first-draft manuscript to London, where Miranda Christen volunteered to type a clean version.[31] Orwell's health worsened further in September, and he was confined to his bed with inflammation of the lungs. He lost almost two stone (28 pounds or 12.7 kg) in weight and had recurring night sweats, but he decided not to see a doctor and continued writing.[32] On 7 November 1947 he completed the first draft in bed, and subsequently travelled to East Kilbride near Glasgow for medical treatment at Hairmyres Hospital, where a specialist confirmed a chronic and infectious case of tuberculosis.[33][31]
Orwell was discharged in the summer of 1948, after which he returned to Jura and produced a full second draft of Nineteen Eighty-Four, which he finished in November. He asked Warburg to have someone come to Barnhill and retype the manuscript, which was so untidy that the task was only considered possible if Orwell were present, as only he could understand it. The previous volunteer had left the country and no other could be found at short notice, so an impatient Orwell retyped it himself at a rate of roughly 4,000 words a day during bouts of fever and bloody coughing fits.[31] On 4 December 1948 Orwell sent the finished manuscript to Secker & Warburg and left Barnhill for good in January 1949. He recovered at a sanitarium in the Cotswolds.[31]


### Title
Shortly before completion of the second draft, Orwell vacillated between two titles: The Last Man in Europe, an early title, and Nineteen Eighty-Four.[34] Warburg suggested the latter, which he took to be a more commercially viable choice.[35] There has been a theory – doubted by Dorian Lynskey (author of a 2019 book about Nineteen Eighty-Four) – that 1984 was chosen simply as an inversion of the year 1948, the year in which it was being completed. Lynskey says the idea was "first suggested by Orwell's US publisher", and it was also mentioned by Christopher Hitchens in his introduction to the 2003 edition of Animal Farm and 1984, which also notes that the date was meant to give "an immediacy and urgency to the menace of totalitarian rule".[36] However, Lynskey does not believe the inversion theory:
This idea ... seems far too cute for such a serious book. ... Scholars have raised other possibilities. [His wife] Eileen wrote a poem for her old school's centenary called 'End of the Century: 1984.' G. K. Chesterton's 1904 political satire The Napoleon of Notting Hill, which mocks the art of prophecy, opens in 1984. The year is also a significant date in The Iron Heel. But all of these connections are exposed as no more than coincidences by the early drafts of the novel ... First he wrote 1980, then 1982, and only later 1984. The most fateful date in literature was a late amendment.[37]


### Publication
In the run up to publication Orwell called the novel "a beastly book" and expressed some disappointment towards it, thinking it would have been improved had he not been so ill. This was typical of Orwell, who had talked down his other books shortly before their release.[37] Nevertheless, it was enthusiastically received by Secker & Warburg, who acted quickly; before Orwell had left Jura he rejected their proposed blurb that portrayed it as "a thriller mixed up with a love story".[37] He also refused a proposal from the American Book of the Month Club to release an edition without the appendix and chapter on Goldstein's book, a decision which Warburg claimed cut off about £40,000 in sales.[37][38]
Nineteen Eighty-Four was published on 8 June 1949 in Britain;[37][39][40] Orwell predicted earnings of around £500. A first print of 25,575 copies was followed by a further 5,000 copies in March and August 1950.[41] It had the most immediate impact in the United States, following its release there on 13 June 1949 by Harcourt Brace, & Co. An initial print of 20,000 copies was quickly followed by another 10,000 on 1 July, and again on 7 September.[42] By 1970 over 8 million copies had been sold in the US, and in 1984 it topped the country's all-time best seller list.[43]
In June 1952 Orwell's widow, Sonia Brownell, sold the sole remaining manuscript at a charity auction for £50.[44] The draft remains the only surviving literary manuscript from Orwell, and is held at the John Hay Library at Brown University in Providence, Rhode Island, US.[45][46]


### Variant English language editions
In the original published UK and US editions of 1984 numerous small variations in the text exist, the US edition altering Orwell's agreed edit of the text as was typical of publishing practices of the time in regard to spelling and punctuation, as well as some small edits and phrasings. While Orwell rejected a proposed book club edition which would see substantial sections of the book removed, these minor changes passed somewhat under the radar. Other more significant revisions and variant texts also exist, however.
In 1984 Peter Davison edited Nineteen Eighty-Four: The Facsimile of the Extant Manuscript, published by Secker and Warburg in Britain and Harcourt-Brace-Jovanovich in America. This reproduced, page-for-page, Brownell's copy of the original manuscript in facsimiles, as well as a complete typeset versions of that text, complete with Orwell's holograph and typewritten pages, and handwritten amendments and corrections. The book had a preface by Daniel Segal. It has been reprinted in various international editions with translated introductions and notes, and reprinted in English in limited edition formats.
In 1997 Davison produced a definitive text of Nineteen Eighty Four as part of Secker's 20-volume definitive edition of the Complete Works of George Orwell. This edition removed errors and reversed editorial changes in the original editions made without Orwell's oversight, all based on detailed reference to Orwell's original manuscript and notes. This text has gone on to be reprinted in various subsequent paperback editions, including one with an introduction by the novelist Thomas Pynchon, without obvious note that it is a revised text, and has been translated as an unexpurgated version of text.
In 2021 Polygon published Nineteen Eighty Four: The Jura Edition, with an introduction by Alex Massie.


## Sources for literary motifs
Nineteen Eighty-Four uses themes from life in the Soviet Union and wartime life in Great Britain as sources for many of its motifs. Some time at an unspecified date after the first American publication of the book, the producer Sidney Sheldon wrote to Orwell interested in adapting the novel to the Broadway stage. Orwell wrote in a letter to Sheldon (to whom he would sell the US stage rights) that his basic goal with Nineteen Eighty-Four was imagining the consequences of Stalinist government ruling British society:
[Nineteen Eighty-Four] was based chiefly on communism, because that is the dominant form of totalitarianism, but I was trying chiefly to imagine what communism would be like if it were firmly rooted in the English speaking countries, and was no longer a mere extension of the Russian Foreign Office.[47]
According to Orwell's biographer D. J. Taylor Orwell's A Clergyman's Daughter (1935) has "essentially the same plot of Nineteen Eighty-Four ... It's about somebody who is spied upon, and eavesdropped upon, and oppressed by vast exterior forces they can do nothing about. It makes an attempt at rebellion and then has to compromise".[48]
The statement "2 + 2 = 5", used to torment Winston Smith during his interrogation, was a communist party slogan from the second five-year plan, which encouraged fulfilment of the five-year plan in four years. The slogan was seen in electric lights on Moscow house-fronts, billboards and elsewhere.[49]
The switch of Oceania's allegiance from Eastasia to Eurasia and the subsequent rewriting of history ("Oceania was at war with Eastasia: Oceania had always been at war with Eastasia. A large part of the political literature of five years was now completely obsolete"; ch 9) is evocative of the Soviet Union's changing relations with Nazi Germany. The two nations were open and frequently vehement critics of each other until the signing of the 1939 Treaty of Non-Aggression. Thereafter, and continuing until the Nazi invasion of the Soviet Union in 1941, no criticism of Germany was allowed in the Soviet press, and all references to prior party lines stopped—including in the majority of non-Russian communist parties who tended to follow the Russian line. Orwell had criticised the Communist Party of Great Britain for supporting the Treaty in his essays for Betrayal of the Left (1941). "The Hitler-Stalin pact of August 1939 reversed the Soviet Union's stated foreign policy. It was too much for many of the fellow-travellers like Gollancz [Orwell's sometime publisher] who had put their faith in a strategy of construction Popular Front governments and the peace bloc between Russia, Britain and France."[50]
The description of Emmanuel Goldstein, with a "small, goatee beard", evokes the image of Leon Trotsky. The film of Goldstein during the Two Minutes Hate is described as showing him being transformed into a bleating sheep. This image was used in a propaganda film during the Kino-eye period of Soviet film, which showed Trotsky transforming into a goat.[51][page needed] Like Goldstein, Trotsky was a formerly high-ranking party official who was ostracised and then wrote a book criticising party rule, The Revolution Betrayed, published in 1936.
The omnipresent images of Big Brother, a man described as having a moustache, bears resemblance to the cult of personality built up around Joseph Stalin.[52]
The news in Oceania emphasised production figures, just as it did in the Soviet Union, where record-setting in factories (by "Heroes of Socialist Labour") was especially glorified. The best known of these was Alexei Stakhanov, who purportedly set a record for coal mining in 1935.[53]
The tortures of the Ministry of Love evoke the procedures used by the NKVD in their interrogations,[54][page needed] including beatings, deprivation, and torture through the use of their greatest fear.[55]
The random bombing of Airstrip One is based on the area bombing of London by Buzz bombs and the V-2 rocket in 1944–1945.[52]
The Thought Police is based on the NKVD, which arrested people for "anti-Soviet" remarks.[56][page needed]
The confessions of the "Thought Criminals" Rutherford, Aaronson and Jones are based on the show trials of the 1930s, which included fabricated confessions by the prominent Bolsheviks Nikolai Bukharin, Grigory Zinoviev and Lev Kamenev to the effect that they were being paid by the Nazi government to undermine the Soviet regime under Leon Trotsky's direction.[57]
The song "Under the Spreading Chestnut Tree" ("Under the spreading chestnut tree, I sold you, and you sold me") was based on an old English song called "Go no more a-rushing" ("Under the spreading chestnut tree, Where I knelt upon my knee, We were as happy as could be, 'Neath the spreading chestnut tree."). The song was published as early as 1891. The song was a popular camp song in the 1920s, sung with corresponding movements (like touching one's chest when singing "chest", and touching one's head when singing "nut"). Glenn Miller recorded the song in 1939.[58]
The "Hates" (Two Minutes Hate and Hate Week) were inspired by the constant rallies sponsored by party organs throughout the Stalinist period. These were often short pep-talks given to workers before their shifts began (Two Minutes Hate),[59] but could also last for days, as in the annual celebrations of the anniversary of the October Revolution (Hate Week).
Orwell fictionalised "newspeak", "doublethink" and "Ministry of Truth" based on both the Soviet press, and British wartime usage, such as "Miniform".[60] In particular, he adapted Soviet ideological discourse constructed to ensure that public statements could not be questioned.[61]
Winston Smith's job, "revising history" (and the "unperson" motif) are based on censorship of images in the Soviet Union, which airbrushed images of "fallen" people from group photographs and removed references to them in books and newspapers.[63] In one well-known example, the second edition of the Great Soviet Encyclopedia had an article about Lavrentiy Beria. After his fall from power and execution, subscribers received a letter from the editor[64] instructing them to cut out and destroy the three-page article on Beria and paste in its place enclosed replacement pages expanding the adjacent articles on F. W. Bergholz (an 18th-century courtier), the Bering Sea and Bishop Berkeley.[65][66][67]
Big Brother's "Orders of the Day" were inspired by Stalin's regular wartime orders, called by the same name. A small collection of the more political of these have been published (together with his wartime speeches) in English as On the Great Patriotic War of the Soviet Union by Joseph Stalin.[68][69] Like Big Brother's orders of the day, Stalin's frequently lauded heroic individuals,[68] like Comrade Ogilvy, the fictitious hero Winston Smith invented to "rectify" (fabricate) a Big Brother Order of the day.
The Ingsoc slogan "Our new, happy life", repeated from telescreens, evokes Stalin's 1935 statement, which became a CPSU slogan, "Life has become better, Comrades; life has become more cheerful."[56]
In 1940 the Argentine writer Jorge Luis Borges published "Tlön, Uqbar, Orbis Tertius", which describes the invention by a "benevolent secret society" of a world that would seek to remake human language and reality along human-invented lines. The story concludes with an appendix describing the success of the project. Borges' story addresses similar themes of epistemology, language and history to 1984.[70]
During the Second World War Orwell believed British democracy as it existed before 1939 would not survive; the question being, "Would it end via Fascist coup d'état from above or via Socialist revolution from below?"[71] Later he admitted that events proved him wrong: "What really matters is that I fell into the trap of assuming that 'the war and the revolution are inseparable'."[72]
In his 1946 essay "Why I Write" Orwell explains that the serious works he wrote since the Spanish Civil War (1936–39) were "written, directly or indirectly, against totalitarianism and for democratic socialism".[4][73] Nineteen Eighty-Four is a cautionary tale about revolution betrayed by totalitarian defenders previously proposed in Homage to Catalonia (1938) and Animal Farm (1945), while Coming Up for Air (1939) celebrates the personal and political freedoms lost in Nineteen Eighty-Four (1949). The biographer Michael Shelden notes Orwell's Edwardian childhood at Henley-on-Thames as the golden country; being bullied at St Cyprian's School as his empathy with victims; his life in the Indian Imperial Police in Burma and the techniques of violence and censorship in the BBC as capricious authority.[74]
Other influences include Darkness at Noon (1940) and The Yogi and the Commissar (1945) by Arthur Koestler; The Iron Heel (1908) by Jack London; 1920: Dips into the Near Future[75] by John A. Hobson; Brave New World (1932) by Aldous Huxley; We (1921) by Yevgeny Zamyatin which he reviewed in 1946;[76] and The Managerial Revolution (1940) by James Burnham predicting perpetual war among three totalitarian superstates. Orwell told the writer Jacintha Buddicom that he would write a novel stylistically like A Modern Utopia (1905) by H. G. Wells.[77]
Extrapolating from the Second World War, the novel's pastiche parallels the politics and rhetoric at war's end—the changed alliances at the "Cold War's" (1945–91) beginning; the Ministry of Truth derives from the BBC's overseas service, controlled by the Ministry of Information; Room 101 derives from a conference room at BBC Broadcasting House;[78] the Senate House of the University of London, containing the Ministry of Information is the architectural inspiration for the Minitrue; the post-war decrepitude derives from the socio-political life of the UK and the US, i.e., the impoverished Britain of 1948 losing its Empire despite newspaper-reported imperial triumph; and war ally but peace-time foe, Soviet Russia became Eurasia.[79]
The term "English Socialism" has precedents in Orwell's wartime writings; in the essay "The Lion and the Unicorn: Socialism and the English Genius" (1941), he said that "the war and the revolution are inseparable... the fact that we are at war has turned Socialism from a textbook word into a realisable policy"—because Britain's superannuated social class system hindered the war effort and only a socialist economy would defeat Adolf Hitler. Given the middle class's grasping this, they too would abide socialist revolution and that only reactionary Britons would oppose it, thus limiting the force revolutionaries would need to take power. An English Socialism would come about which "will never lose touch with the tradition of compromise and the belief in a law that is above the State. It will shoot traitors, but it will give them a solemn trial beforehand and occasionally it will acquit them. It will crush any open revolt promptly and cruelly, but it will interfere very little with the spoken and written word."[80]
In the world of Nineteen Eighty-Four "English Socialism" (or "Ingsoc" in Newspeak) is a totalitarian ideology unlike the English revolution he foresaw. Comparison of the wartime essay "The Lion and the Unicorn" with Nineteen Eighty-Four shows that he perceived a Big Brother regime as a perversion of his cherished socialist ideals and English Socialism. Thus Oceania is a corruption of the British Empire he believed would evolve "into a federation of Socialist states, like a looser and freer version of the Union of Soviet Republics".[81][verification needed]


## Themes


### Nationalism
Nineteen Eighty-Four expands upon the subjects summarised in Orwell's essay "Notes on Nationalism"[82] about the lack of vocabulary needed to explain the unrecognised phenomena behind certain political forces. In Nineteen Eighty-Four, the Party's artificial, minimalist language 'Newspeak' addresses the matter.
Positive nationalism: For instance, Oceanians' perpetual love for Big Brother. Orwell argues in the essay that ideologies such as Neo-Toryism and Celtic nationalism are defined by their obsessive sense of loyalty to some entity.
Negative nationalism: For instance, Oceanians' perpetual hatred for Emmanuel Goldstein. Orwell argues in the essay that ideologies such as Trotskyism and antisemitism are defined by their obsessive hatred of some entity.
Transferred nationalism: For instance, when Oceania's enemy changes, an orator makes a change mid-sentence, and the crowd instantly transfers its hatred to the new enemy. Orwell argues that ideologies such as Stalinism[83] and redirected feelings of racial animus and class superiority among wealthy intellectuals exemplify this. Transferred nationalism swiftly redirects emotions from one power unit to another. In the novel, it happens during Hate Week, a Party rally against the original enemy. The crowd goes wild and destroys the posters that are now against their new friend, and many say that they must be the act of an agent of their new enemy and former friend. Many of the crowd must have put up the posters before the rally but think that the state of affairs had always been the case.
O'Brien concludes: "The object of persecution is persecution. The object of torture is torture. The object of power is power."[84]


### Futurology
In the novel O'Brien describes the Party's vision of the future:
There will be no curiosity, no enjoyment of the process of life. All competing pleasures will be destroyed. But always—do not forget this, Winston—always there will be the intoxication of power, constantly increasing and constantly growing subtler. Always, at every moment, there will be the thrill of victory, the sensation of trampling on an enemy who is helpless. If you want a picture of the future, imagine a boot stamping on a human face—forever.
— Part III, chapter III, Nineteen Eighty-Four


### Censorship
One of the most notable themes in Nineteen Eighty-Four is censorship, especially in the Ministry of Truth, where photographs and public archives are manipulated to rid them of "unpersons" (people who have been erased from history by the Party).[85] On the telescreens, almost all figures of production are grossly exaggerated or simply fabricated to indicate an ever-growing economy, even during times when the reality is the opposite. One small example of the endless censorship is Winston being charged with the task of eliminating a reference to an unperson in a newspaper article. He also proceeds to write an article about Comrade Ogilvy, a made-up party member who allegedly "displayed great heroism by leaping into the sea from a helicopter so that the dispatches he was carrying would not fall into enemy hands."[86]


### Surveillance
In Oceania the upper and middle classes have very little true privacy. All of their houses and apartments are equipped with two-way telescreens so that they may be watched or listened to at any time. Similar telescreens are found at workstations and in public places, along with hidden microphones. Written correspondence is routinely opened and read by the government before it is delivered. The Thought Police employ undercover agents, who pose as normal citizens and report any person with subversive tendencies. Children are encouraged to report suspicious persons to the government, and some denounce their parents. Citizens are controlled, and the smallest sign of rebellion, even something as small as a suspicious facial expression, can result in immediate arrest and imprisonment. Thus, citizens are compelled to obedience.


### Poverty and inequality
Almost the entire world lives in poverty; hunger, thirst, disease and filth are the norms. Ruined cities and towns are common: the consequence of perpetual wars and extreme economic inefficiency. Social decay and wrecked buildings surround Winston; aside from the ministries' headquarters, little of London was rebuilt. Middle-class citizens and proles consume synthetic foodstuffs and poor-quality "luxuries" such as oily gin and loosely-packed cigarettes, distributed under the "Victory" brand, a parody of the low-quality Indian-made "Victory" cigarettes, which British soldiers commonly smoked during the Second World War.
Winston describes something as simple as the repair of a broken window as requiring committee approval that can take several years and so most of those living in one of the blocks usually do the repairs themselves (Winston himself is called in by Mrs. Parsons to repair her blocked sink). All upper-class and middle-class residences include telescreens that serve both as outlets for propaganda and surveillance devices that allow the Thought Police to monitor them; they can be turned down, but the ones in middle-class residences cannot be turned off.
In contrast to their subordinates, the upper class of Oceanian society reside in clean and comfortable flats in their own quarters, with pantries well-stocked with foodstuffs such as wine, real coffee, real tea, real milk and real sugar, all denied to the general populace.[87] Winston is astonished that the lifts in O'Brien's building work, the telescreens can be completely turned off, and O'Brien has an Asian manservant, Martin. All upper-class citizens are attended to by slaves captured in the "disputed zone", and "The Book" suggests that many have their own cars or even helicopters.
However, despite their insulation and overt privileges, the upper class are still not exempt from the government's brutal restriction of thought and behaviour, even while lies and propaganda apparently originate from their own ranks. Instead, the Oceanian government offers the upper class their "luxuries" in exchange for maintaining their loyalty to the state; non-conformant upper-class citizens can still be condemned, tortured, and executed just like any other individual. "The Book" makes clear that the upper class' living conditions are only "relatively" comfortable, and would be regarded as "austere" by those of the pre-revolutionary élite.[88]
The proles live in poverty and are kept sedated with synthetic entertainment such as pornography, a national lottery whose "big prizes" are always won by non-existent people, and gin, "which the proles were not supposed to drink". At the same time, the proles are freer and less intimidated than the upper classes: they are not expected to be particularly patriotic and the levels of surveillance that they are subjected to are very low; they lack telescreens in their own homes. "The Book" indicates that because the middle class, not the lower class, traditionally starts revolutions, the model demands tight control of the middle class, with ambitious Outer-Party members neutralised via promotion to the Inner Party or "reintegration" (brainwashing via psychological and physical torture) by the Ministry of Love, and proles can be allowed intellectual freedom because they are deemed to lack intellect. Winston nonetheless believes that "the future belonged to the proles".[89]
The standard of living of the populace is extremely low overall.[90] Consumer goods are scarce, and those available through official channels are of low quality; for instance, despite the Party regularly reporting increased boot production, more than half of the Oceanian populace goes barefoot.[91] The Party claims that poverty is a necessary sacrifice for the war effort, and "The Book" confirms that to be partially correct since the purpose of perpetual war is to consume surplus industrial production.[92] As "The Book" explains, society is in fact designed to remain on the brink of starvation, as "In the long run, a hierarchical society was only possible on a basis of poverty and ignorance."


### Thought monitoring
The Party monitors facial expressions and aims to find out and control the thoughts of citizens through the "Thought Police" and the detection and elimination of "thoughtcrime". The Party rejects the legal principle "Cogitationis poenam nemo patitur" ("Thought does not commit a crime").
It was terribly dangerous to let your thoughts wander when you were in any public place or within range of a telescreen. The smallest thing could give you away. A nervous tic, an unconscious look of anxiety, a habit of muttering to yourself—anything that carried with it the suggestion of abnormality, of having something to hide. In any case, to wear an improper expression on your face (to look incredulous when a victory was announced, for example) was itself a punishable offence. There was even a word for it in Newspeak: FACECRIME, it was called.[93]
One is how to discover, against his will, what another human being is thinking, (...) The scientist of today is either a mixture of psychologist and inquisitor, studying with real ordinary minuteness the meaning of facial expressions, gestures, and tones of voice, and testing the truth-producing effects of drugs, shock therapy, hypnosis, and physical torture; (...)[94]
We are not interested in those stupid crimes that you have committed. The Party is not interested in the overt act: the thought is all we care about.[95]


## Critical reception
When it was first published, Nineteen Eighty-Four received critical acclaim. V. S. Pritchett, reviewing it for the New Statesman, wrote: "I do not think I have ever read a novel more frightening and depressing; and yet, such are the originality, the suspense, the speed of writing and withering indignation that it is impossible to put the book down."[96] P. H. Newby, reviewing Nineteen Eighty-Four for The Listener magazine, described it as "the most arresting political novel written by an Englishman since Rex Warner's The Aerodrome."[97] Nineteen Eighty-Four was also praised by Bertrand Russell, E. M. Forster and Harold Nicolson.[97] On the other hand, Edward Shanks, reviewing Nineteen Eighty-Four for The Sunday Times, was dismissive, saying Nineteen Eighty-Four "breaks all records for gloomy vaticination".[97] C. S. Lewis was also critical of the novel, claiming that the relationship of Julia and Winston, and especially the Party's view on sex, lacked credibility, and that the setting was "odious rather than tragic".[98] The historian Isaac Deutscher was far more critical of Orwell from a Marxist perspective, and characterised him as a “simple minded anarchist”. Deutscher argued that Orwell had struggled to comprehend the dialectical philosophy of Marxism, demonstrated personal ambivalence towards other strands of socialism, and that Nineteen Eighty-Four had been appropriated for the purpose of anti-communist Cold War propaganda.[99][100]
Upon its publication many American reviewers interpreted it as a statement on the socialist policies of the British prime minister, Clement Attlee, or the policies of Joseph Stalin.[101] Serving as prime minister from 1945 to 1951, Attlee implemented wide-ranging social reforms and changes in the British economy following the Second World War. The American trade union leader Francis A. Hanson wanted to recommend the book to his members, but was concerned with some of the reviews it had received, so Orwell wrote a letter to him.[102][101] In it he described his novel as a satire, and said:
I do not believe that the kind of society I describe will necessarily arrive, but I believe (allowing, of course, for the fact that the book is a satire) that something resembling it could arrive...[it is] a show...[of the] perversions to which a centralised economy is liable and which have already been partly realisable in communism and fascism.
— George Orwell, Letter to Francis A. Hanson
Throughout its publication history Nineteen Eighty-Four has been banned and legally challenged as subversive or ideologically corrupting, like the dystopian novels We (1924) by Yevgeny Zamyatin, Brave New World (1932) by Aldous Huxley, Darkness at Noon (1940) by Arthur Koestler, Kallocain (1940) by Karin Boye and Fahrenheit 451 (1953) by Ray Bradbury.[103]
On 5 November 2019 the BBC named Nineteen Eighty-Four on its list of the 100 most influential novels.[104]
According to Czesław Miłosz, a defector from Stalinist Poland, the book also made an impression behind the Iron Curtain. Writing in The Captive Mind, he stated "[a] few have become acquainted with Orwell's 1984; because it is both difficult to obtain and dangerous to possess, it is known only to certain members of the Inner Party. Orwell fascinates them through his insight into details they know well ... Even those who know Orwell only by hearsay are amazed that a writer who never lived in Russia should have so keen a perception into its life."[105][106] The writer Christopher Hitchens has called this "one of the greatest compliments that one writer has ever bestowed upon another ... Only one or two years after Orwell's death, in other words, his book about a secret book circulated only within the Inner Party was itself a secret book circulated only within the Inner Party."[105]: 54–55


## Adaptations in other media
In the same year as the novel's publishing, a one-hour radio adaptation was aired on the United States' NBC radio network as part of the NBC University Theatre series. The first television adaptation appeared as part of CBS's Studio One series in September 1953.[107] BBC Television broadcast an adaptation by Nigel Kneale in December 1954. The first feature film adaptation, 1984, was released in 1956. A second feature-length adaptation, Nineteen Eighty-Four, followed in 1984, a reasonably faithful adaptation. The story has been adapted several other times to radio, television and film; other media adaptations include theatre (a musical[108] and a play), an opera and ballet.[109] An audio dramatisation was released in 2024 to critical acclaim, starring Andrew Garfield as Winston.


## Translations
The novel was banned in the Soviet Union until 1988, when the first publicly available Russian version in the country, translated by Vyacheslav Nedoshivin, was published in Kodry, a literary journal of Soviet Moldavia. In 1989 another Russian version, translated by Viktor Golyshev, was also published. Outside the Soviet Union, the first Russian version was serialised in the emigre magazine Grani in the mid-1950s, then published as a book in 1957 in Frankfurt. Another Russian version, translated by Sergei Tolstoy from a French version, was published in Rome in 1966. These translations were smuggled into the Soviet Union and became quite popular among dissidents.[110] Some underground published translations also appeared in the Soviet Union. The Soviet philosopher Evald Ilyenkov translated it from German into Russian.[111]
For the Soviet elite, as early as 1959, according to the order of the Ideological Department of the Central Committee of the Soviet Communist Party, the Foreign Literature Publishers secretly issued a Russian version of the novel, for the senior officers of the Communist Party.[112]
In the People's Republic of China the first Simplified Chinese version, translated by Dong Leshan, was serialised in the periodical Selected Translations from Foreign Literature in 1979, for senior officials and intellectuals deemed politically reliable enough. In 1985 the Chinese version was published by Huacheng Publishing House, as a restricted publication. It was first available to the general public in 1988, by the same publisher.[113] Amy Hawkins and Jeffrey Wasserstrom of The Atlantic stated in 2019 that the book is widely available in mainland China for several reasons: the general public largely no longer read books; because the elites who do read books feel connected to the ruling party anyway; and because the Communist Party sees being too aggressive in blocking cultural products as a liability. The authors stated, "It was—and remains—as easy to buy 1984 and Animal Farm in Shenzhen or Shanghai as it is in London or Los Angeles."[114] They also stated that "The assumption is not that Chinese people can't figure out the meaning of 1984, but that the small number of people who will bother to read it won't pose much of a threat."[114] The journalist Michael Rank argued that it is only because the novel is set in London and written by a foreigner that the Chinese authorities believe it has nothing to do with China.[113]
By 1989 Nineteen Eighty-Four had been translated into 65 languages, more than any other novel in English at that time.[115]
The amateur translator Tsiu Ing-sing's Taiwanese Hokkien translation, which uses romanisation alongside Chinese characters, was published in 2025.[116]


## Cultural impact
The effect of Nineteen Eighty-Four on the English language is extensive; the concepts of Big Brother, Room 101, the Thought Police, thoughtcrime, unperson, memory hole (oblivion), doublethink (simultaneously holding and believing contradictory beliefs) and Newspeak (ideological language) have become common phrases for denoting totalitarian authority. Doublespeak and groupthink are both deliberate elaborations of doublethink, and the adjective "Orwellian" means similar to Orwell's writings, especially Nineteen Eighty-Four. The practice of ending words with "-speak" (such as mediaspeak) is drawn from the novel.[117] Orwell is perpetually associated with 1984; in July 1984 an asteroid was discovered by Antonín Mrkos and named after Orwell.
References to the themes, concepts and plot of Nineteen Eighty-Four have appeared frequently in other works, especially in popular music and video entertainment. An example is the worldwide hit reality television show Big Brother, in which a group of people live together in a large house, isolated from the outside world but continuously watched by television cameras.
Noam Chomsky adapted Orwell's neologism "unpeople" to describe those whom the state deems "unfit to enter history" and whom the state strips of the right to live in order to advance the state's sovereignty.[118]: 313
In November 2012 the United States federal government argued before the US Supreme Court that it could continue to use GPS tracking of individuals without first seeking a warrant. In response, Justice Stephen Breyer questioned what that means for a democratic society by referencing Nineteen Eighty-Four, stating "If you win this case, then there is nothing to prevent the police or the government from monitoring 24 hours a day the public movement of every citizen of the United States. So if you win, you suddenly produce what sounds like 1984 ..."[119]
The book touches on the invasion of privacy and ubiquitous surveillance. From mid-2013 it was publicised that the American National Security Agency has been secretly monitoring and storing global internet traffic, including the bulk data collection of email and phone call data. Sales of Nineteen Eighty-Four increased by up to seven times within the first week of the 2013 mass surveillance leaks.[120][121][122] The book again topped the Amazon.com sales charts in 2017 after a controversy involving Kellyanne Conway using the phrase "alternative facts" to explain discrepancies with the media.[123][124][125][126]
Nineteen Eighty-Four was number three on the list of "Top Check Outs of All Time" by the New York Public Library.[127]
Nineteen Eighty-Four entered the public domain on 1 January 2021, 70 years after Orwell's death, in most of the world. It is still under copyright in the US until 95 years after publication, or 2044.[128][129]


## Brave New Worldcomparisons
In October 1949, after reading Nineteen Eighty-Four, Huxley sent a letter to Orwell in which he argued that it would be more efficient for rulers to stay in power by the softer touch by allowing citizens to seek pleasure to control them rather than use brute force. He wrote:
Whether in actual fact the policy of the boot-on-the-face can go on indefinitely seems doubtful. My own belief is that the ruling oligarchy will find less arduous and wasteful ways of governing and of satisfying its lust for power, and these ways will resemble those which I described in Brave New World.
...
Within the next generation I believe that the world's rulers will discover that infant conditioning and narco-hypnosis are more efficient, as instruments of government, than clubs and prisons, and that the lust for power can be just as completely satisfied by suggesting people into loving their servitude as by flogging and kicking them into obedience.[130]
In the decades since the publication of Nineteen Eighty-Four, there have been numerous comparisons to Huxley's Brave New World, which had been published 17 years earlier, in 1932.[131][132][133][134] They are both predictions of societies dominated by a central government and are both based on extensions of the trends of their times. However, members of the ruling class of Nineteen Eighty-Four use brutal force, torture and harsh mind control to keep individuals in line, while rulers in Brave New World keep the citizens in line by drugs, hypnosis, genetic conditioning and pleasurable distractions. Regarding censorship, in Nineteen Eighty-Four the government tightly controls information to keep the population in line, but in Huxley's world, so much information is published that readers are easily distracted and overlook the information that is relevant.[135]
Elements of both novels can be seen in modern-day societies, with Huxley's vision being more dominant in the West and Orwell's vision more prevalent with dictatorships, as is pointed out in essays that compare the two novels, including Huxley's own Brave New World Revisited.[136][137][138][126]
Comparisons with later dystopian novels like The Handmaid's Tale, Virtual Light, The Private Eye and The Children of Men have also been drawn.[139][140]


## In popular culture
In 1955 an episode of BBC's The Goon Show, 1985, was broadcast, written by Spike Milligan and Eric Sykes and based on Nigel Kneale's television adaptation. It was re-recorded about a month later with the same script but a slightly different cast.[141] 1985 parodies many of the main scenes in Orwell's novel.
In 1970 the American rock group Spirit released the song "1984" based on Orwell's novel.
In 1973 the ex–Soft Machine bassist Hugh Hopper released an album called 1984 on the Columbia label (UK), consisting of instrumentals with Orwellian titles such as "Miniluv", "Minipax", "Minitrue" and so forth.
In 1974 David Bowie released the album Diamond Dogs, which is thought to be loosely based on Nineteen Eighty-Four. It includes the tracks "We Are the Dead", "1984" and "Big Brother". Before the album was made, Bowie's management (MainMan) had planned for Bowie and Tony Ingrassia (MainMan's creative consultant) to co-write and direct a musical production of Orwell's Nineteen Eighty-Four, but Orwell's widow refused to give MainMan the rights.[142][143]
In 1977 the British rock band the Jam released the album This Is the Modern World, which includes the track "Standards" by Paul Weller. This track concludes with the lyrics "...and ignorance is strength, we have God on our side, look, you know what happened to Winston."[144]
In 1984 Ridley Scott directed a television commercial, "1984", to launch Apple's Macintosh computer.[145] The advertisement stated, "1984 won't be like 1984", suggesting that the Apple Mac would be freedom from Big Brother, i.e., the IBM PC.[146]
Rage Against the Machine's 2000 single, "Testify", from their album The Battle of Los Angeles, features the use of "The Party" slogan, "Who controls the past(now), controls the future. Who controls the present(now), controls the past."[144]
An episode of Doctor Who, "The God Complex", depicts an alien ship disguised as a hotel containing Room 101-like spaces, and also, like the novel, quotes the nursery rhyme "Oranges and Lemons".[147]
Radiohead's 2003 single "2 + 2 = 5", from their album Hail to the Thief, is Orwellian by title and content. Thom Yorke states, "I was listening to a lot of political programs on BBC Radio 4. I found myself writing down little nonsense phrases, those Orwellian euphemisms that [the British and American governments] are so fond of. They became the background of the record."[144]
In September 2009 the English rock band Muse released The Resistance, which included songs influenced by Nineteen Eighty-Four.[148]
In Marilyn Manson's autobiography The Long Hard Road Out of Hell, he states: "I was thoroughly terrified by the idea of the end of the world and the Antichrist. So I became obsessed with it... reading prophetic books like... 1984 by George Orwell..."[149]
The English band Bastille reference the novel in their song "Back to the Future", the fifth track on their 2022 album Give Me the Future, in the opening lyrics: "Feels like we danced into a nightmare/We're living 1984/If doublethink's no longer fiction/We'll dream of Huxley's Island shores."[150]
Released in 2004, KAKU P-Model/Susumu Hirasawa's song "Big Brother" directly references 1984, and the album itself is about a fictional dystopia in a distant future.
The Used released a song by the same name, "1984", on their 2020 album Heartwork.[151]


## See also
United Kingdom portal
Novels portal
Speculative fiction portal
Politics portal
Authoritarian personality
Closed-circuit television (CCTV)
Culture of fear
Fahrenheit 451, a similar novel revolving around censorship
Ideocracy
Language and thought
List of stories set in a future now in the past
Mass surveillance
New World Order (conspiracy theory)
Psychological projection
Scapegoating
V for Vendetta, a similar graphic novel and film
We, a similar novel


## References


### Citations
^ "Nineteen Eighty-Four". knowthyshelf.com. 13 August 2015. Retrieved 11 February 2024.
^ "Classify". OCLC. Archived from the original on 2 February 2019. Retrieved 22 May 2017.
^ Murphy, Bruce (1996). Benét's reader's encyclopedia. New York: Harper Collins. p. 734. ISBN 978-0-06-181088-6. OCLC 35572906.
^ a b Aaronovitch, David (8 February 2013). "1984: George Orwell's road to dystopia". BBC News. Archived from the original on 24 January 2018. Retrieved 8 February 2013.
^ Lynskey, Dorian (10 June 2019). "George Orwell's 1984: Why it still matters". BBC News. Archived from the original on 12 October 2023. Retrieved 7 October 2023 – via YouTube.
^ Chernow, Barbara; Vallasi, George (1993). The Columbia Encyclopedia (5th ed.). Boston: Houghton Mifflin. p. 2030. OCLC 334011745.
^ Crouch, Ian (11 June 2013). "So Are We Living in 1984?". The New Yorker. Archived from the original on 10 September 2023. Retrieved 3 December 2019.
^ Seaton, Jean. "Why Orwell's 1984 could be about now". BBC. Archived from the original on 10 May 2020. Retrieved 3 December 2019.
^ Leetaru, Kalev. "As Orwell's 1984 Turns 70 It Predicted Much of Today's Surveillance Society". Forbes. Archived from the original on 27 March 2023. Retrieved 3 December 2019.
^ a b "The savage satire of '1984' still speaks to us today". The Independent. 7 June 1999. Archived from the original on 7 January 2023. Retrieved 7 January 2023. Orwell said that his book was a satire – a warning certainly, but in the form of satire.
^ Grossman, Lev (8 January 2010). "Is 1984 one of the All-TIME 100 Best Novels?". Time. Archived from the original on 20 August 2017. Retrieved 29 December 2022.
^ "100 Best Novels". Modern Library. Archived from the original on 2 October 2010. Retrieved 29 December 2022.
^ "The Big Read – Top 100 Books". BBC. Archived from the original on 31 October 2012. Retrieved 29 December 2022.
^ a b c d Sanderson, Richard K. (1988). "The Two Narrators and Happy Ending of "Nineteen Eighty-Four"". Modern Fiction Studies. 34 (4): 587–595. ISSN 0026-7724. JSTOR 26283509. Retrieved 28 June 2025.
^ a b c d Sanchez, Julian (27 June 2025). "Orwell's Happy Ending". Non-Content. Retrieved 28 June 2025.
^ Martyris, Nina (18 September 2014). "George Orwell Weighs in on Scottish Independence". LA Review of Books. Archived from the original on 28 October 2017. Retrieved 20 October 2017.
^ This may be a reference to "McAndrew's Hymn", which includes the lines "From coupler-flange to spindle-guide I see Thy Hand, O God— / Predestination in the stride o' yon connectin'-rod".[16]
^ a b "Orwell's Notes on 1984: Mapping the Inspiration of a Modern Classic". Literary Hub. 18 October 2019. Archived from the original on 1 January 2023. Retrieved 1 January 2023.
^ Bowker 2003, p. 329.
^ "Reporting from the Ruins". The Orwell Society. 3 October 2021. Archived from the original on 26 March 2023. Retrieved 3 April 2023.
^ a b Lynskey 2019, ch. 6: "The Heretic"
^ a b Bowker 2003, p. 330.
^ Bowker 2003, p. 334.
^ a b c Lynskey 2019, ch. 7: "Inconvenient Facts"
^ Bowker 2003, p. 336.
^ Bowker 2003, p. 337.
^ Bowker 2003, p. 346.
^ Bowker 2003, p. 319.
^ Bowker 2003, pp. 353, 357.
^ Bowker 2003, p. 370.
^ a b c d Lynskey 2019, ch. 8: "Every Book Is a Failure"
^ Bowker 2003, p. 373.
^ Bowker 2003, p. 374.
^ Orwell, George (1968). Orwell, Sonia; Angus, Ian (eds.). The Collected Essays, Journalism, and Letters of George Orwell Vol. IV: In Front Of Your Nose 1945-1950. New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich. p. 448. Retrieved 19 May 2024 – via Internet Archive.
^ Crick, Bernard. Introduction to Nineteen Eighty-Four (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1984).
^ Orwell 2003a, p. x.
^ a b c d e Lynskey 2019, ch. 9: "The Clocks Strike Thirteen"
^ Shelden 1991, p. 470.
^ Bowker 2003, pp. 383, 399.
^ "Charles' George Orwell Links". Netcharles.com. Archived from the original on 18 July 2011. Retrieved 4 July 2011.
^ Bowker 2003, p. 399.
^ Bowker 2003, p. 401.
^ Bowker 2003, p. 411.
^ Bowker 2003, p. 426.
^ "Brown library buys singer Janis Ian's collection of fantasy, science fiction". Providence Journal. 17 September 2019. Archived from the original on 24 September 2019. Retrieved 24 September 2019.
^ Braga, Jennifer (10 June 2019). "Announcement | 70th Anniversary of Orwell's Nineteen Eighty-Four". Brown University Library News. Archived from the original on 24 September 2019. Retrieved 24 September 2019.
^ Sheldon, Sidney (2006) The Other Side of Me, Grand Central Publishing, p. 213 [ISBN missing]
^ Taylor, D. J. "The Best George Orwell Books". Five Books (Interview). Interviewed by Stephanie Kelley. Archived from the original on 30 October 2019. Retrieved 30 October 2019.
^ Tzouliadis, Tim (2008). The Forsaken: An American Tragedy in Stalin's Russia. New York: Penguin Press. pp. 48–49. ISBN 978-1-59420-168-4.
^ Perry, Matthew. "Left Book Club Anthology". Reviews in History. Institute of Historical Research. Archived from the original on 29 December 2022. Retrieved 29 December 2022.
^ Vertov, Dziga (1985). Kino-Eye: The Writings of Dziga Vertov. University of California Press. ISBN 978-0-520-05630-5.[page needed]
^ a b Lynskey 2019, p. [page needed].
^ Siegelbaum, Lewis (2000). Stalinism as a Way of Life. Yale University Press. p. 100. ISBN 0-300-08480-3.
^ Senyonovna, Eugenia (1967). Journey into the Whirlwind. New York: Harcourt, Brace & World, Inc.[page needed]
^ Tymkiv, Vasyl (23 February 2024). "Terror in NKVD Prisons in Stanislav Region during 1939-1941". Law & Society. 9: 210–218. ISSN 2719-552X.
^ a b Fitzpatrick, Sheila (1999). Everyday Stalinism. New York: Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-505001-1.[page needed]
^ Lynskey 2019, p. 22.
^ "Go No More a-Rushing (Riddle Song)". Sniff.numachi.com. Archived from the original on 18 May 2021. Retrieved 2 January 2012.
^ Werth, Alexander (2017). Russia at War, 1941–1945: A History. Skyhorse Publishers. ISBN 978-1510716254.
^ Lynskey 2019, p. 88.
^ McCauley, Martin (2014). The Rise and Fall of the Soviet Union. Taylor and Francis. p. 298. ISBN 978-1-317-86783-8. OCLC 869093605.
^ "Newseum: The Commissar Vanishes". Archived from the original on 11 June 2008. Retrieved 19 July 2008.
^ King, David (1997). The Commissar Vanishes: The Falsification of Photographs and Art in Stalin's Russia. Metropolitan / Holt. ISBN 978-0-8050-5294-7.
^ Lambroschini, Sophie. "Russia: Putin-Decreed ‘Great Russian’ Encyclopedia Debuts At Moscow Book Fair". Archived 5 December 2007 at the Wayback Machine Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty.
^ Burnette Jr., O. Lawrence and William Converse Haygood (eds.). A Soviet View of the American past: An Annotated Translation of the Section on American History in the Great Soviet Encyclopedia. Chicago: Scott, Foresman, 1964, p. 7. Archived 4 June 2011 at the Wayback Machine
^ "Soviet Encyclopedia Omits Beria's Name". The Times-News. 2 December 1953. p. 8. Archived from the original on 24 August 2022. Retrieved 23 April 2017 – via Google News Archive.
^ Schacter, Daniel L.; Scarry, Elaine, eds. (2001). Memory, brain, and belief. Cambridge: Harvard University Press. ISBN 978-0-674-00719-2. OCLC 803952174.
^ a b Stalin, Joseph (1944). On the Great Patriotic War of the Soviet Union. Moscow: Foreign Languages Press.
^ "Order of the Day, No. 130, May 1st, 1942". Archived from the original on 13 August 2021. Retrieved 14 December 2011.
^ Foster, David William; Altamiranda, Daniel (1997). Twentieth-century Spanish American Literature to 1960. Garland Pub. ISBN 978-0-8153-2680-9. Archived from the original on 20 November 2023. Retrieved 9 June 2015.
^ Orwell, George (2016). 1984. Enrich Spot Limited. ISBN 978-988-12356-0-2. Archived from the original on 20 November 2023. Retrieved 7 November 2020.
^ "London Letter to Partisan Review, December 1944, quoted from vol. 3 of the Penguin edition of the Collected Essays, Journalism and Letters.
^ "George Orwell: Why I Write". Resort.com. Archived from the original on 9 July 2011. Retrieved 4 July 2011.
^ Shelden 1991, pp. 430–434.
^ Hobson, John A. "1920: Dips into the Near Future". ariwatch.com. Archived from the original on 21 February 2016. Retrieved 29 December 2022.
^ Orwell, George (4 January 1946). "Review: We, by E. I. Zamyatin". Tribune. Archived from the original on 23 March 2023. Retrieved 29 December 2022. Paraphrasing Rayner Heppenstall, he reportedly said "that he was taking it as the model for his next novel" (Bowker 2003, p. 340).
^ "Bloomsbury Collections – George Orwell and Religion". www.bloomsburycollections.com. Archived from the original on 14 April 2021. Retrieved 29 October 2020.
^ "The real room 101". BBC. Archived from the original on 5 January 2007. Retrieved 9 December 2006.Meyers 2000, p. 214
^ Snyder, Timothy (3 September 2014). "To Understand Putin, Read Orwell". POLITICO Magazine. Retrieved 30 April 2025.
^ Orwell, Sonia and Angus, Ian (eds). The Collected Essays, Journalism and Letters of George Orwell, Volume 2: "My Country Right or Left" (1940–43; Penguin)[ISBN missing]
^ Orwell, George (2000). Orwell, Sonia; Angus, Ian (eds.). George Orwell: the Collected Essays, Journalism & Letters (1st Nonpareil ed.). Boston: Nonpareil Books. p. 91. ISBN 978-1-56792-134-2. Archived from the original on 20 November 2023. Retrieved 26 December 2021. The third was to develop a positive imperial policy, and aim at transforming the Empire into a federation of Socialist states, like a looser and freer version of the Union of Soviet Republics.
^ "George Orwell: "Notes on Nationalism"". Resort.com. May 1945. Archived from the original on 27 April 2019. Retrieved 25 March 2010.
^ Decker, James (2004). "George Orwell's 1984 and Political Ideology". Ideology. p. 146. doi:10.1007/978-0-230-62914-1_7. ISBN 978-0-333-77538-7.
^ "George Orwell, 1984, part 3, chapter 3". www.george-orwell.org. Archived from the original on 1 November 2020. Retrieved 29 October 2020.
^ Martin, Mike W.; Department of Philosophy, Florida State University (1984). "Demystifying Doublethink: Self-Deception, Truth, and Freedom in 1984". Social Theory and Practice. 10 (3): 319–331. doi:10.5840/soctheorpract198410314. ISSN 0037-802X.
^ Orwell. 1984. pp. part 1, chapter 4.
^ Reed, Kit (1985). "Barron's Booknotes – 1984 by George Orwell". Barron's Educational Series. Archived from the original on 6 September 2012. Retrieved 2 July 2009.
^ "1984, part 2, chapter 9". Archived from the original on 13 December 2021. Retrieved 17 October 2013.
^ Lines 29–35, p. 229, part II, chapter X, of the Penguin paperback edition of 1984: "The proles were immortal, you could not doubt it when you looked at that valiant figure in the yard. In the end their awakening would come. And until that happened, though it might be a thousand years, they would stay alive against all the odds, like birds, passing on from body to body the vitality which the Party did not share and could not kill".
^ Bossche, Edmond van Den (1 January 1984). "The Message for Today in Orwell's 1984". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 1 November 2020. Retrieved 29 October 2020.
^ "George Orwell, 1984, part 1, chapter 4". www.george-orwell.org. Archived from the original on 1 November 2020. Retrieved 29 October 2020.
^ "Talking People: Your Stuff! – G. Orwell". www.talkingpeople.net. Archived from the original on 20 September 2020. Retrieved 29 October 2020.
^ Orwell 2003a, p. 86.
^ Orwell 2003a, p. 225.
^ Orwell 2003a, p. 288.
^ Howe, Irving (1982). Orwell's Nineteen Eighty-Four: Text, Sources, Criticism. New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich. ISBN 978-0-15-565811-0 pp. 290–293.
^ a b c Fountain, Nigel (14 June 1994). "First Bites: Nineteen Eighty-Four. The Guardian.
^ Lewis, C. S. (1966). "George Orwell". On Stories: And Other Essays on Literature. Harcourt. p. 101.
^ "1984 - The Mysticism of Cruelty, by Isaac Deutscher 1955". www.marxists.org.
^ Newsinger, J. (17 January 1999). Orwell's Politics. Springer. p. 123. ISBN 978-0-333-98360-7.
^ a b "The savage satire of '1984' still speaks to us today". The Independent. 7 June 1999. Archived from the original on 7 January 2023. Retrieved 7 January 2023.
^ Bradford, Richard (23 January 2020). Orwell: A Man Of Our Time. Bloomsbury Publishing. ISBN 978-1-4482-1770-0. Archived from the original on 4 April 2023. Retrieved 13 January 2023.
^ Marcus, Laura; Nicholls, Peter (2005). The Cambridge History of Twentieth-Century English Literature. Cambridge University Press. p. 226. ISBN 978-0-521-82077-6. Brave New World [is] traditionally bracketed with Orwell's Nineteen Eighty-Four as a dystopia ...
^ "100 'most inspiring' novels revealed by BBC Arts". BBC News. 5 November 2019. Archived from the original on 3 November 2020. Retrieved 10 November 2019. The reveal kickstarts the BBC's year-long celebration of literature.
^ a b Hitchens, Christopher (2002). Why Orwell Matters. New York: Basic Books. p. 54. ISBN 978-0-465-03050-7.
^ Cushman, Thomas; Rodden, John (2015). George Orwell: Into the Twenty-first Century. Routledge. p. 82. ISBN 978-1317259237. Archived from the original on 20 November 2023. Retrieved 20 January 2022.
^ 1984 (TV episode 1953) at IMDb
^ "1984! The Musical! | New Theatre". 6 November 2019. Archived from the original on 10 September 2021. Retrieved 10 September 2021.
^ "1984 | Northern Ballet". northernballet.com. Archived from the original on 10 September 2021. Retrieved 10 September 2021.
^ "I Just Translated '1984' Into Russian. I'm Gasping for Air". Moscow Times. 26 November 2019. Archived from the original on 29 June 2023. Retrieved 29 June 2023.
^ "Evald Ilyenkov and Soviet Philosophy". Monthly Review. 1 January 2020. Archived from the original on 1 July 2023. Retrieved 1 July 2023.
^ Blum Arlen Viktorovich. "Orwell's Travels to the country of bolsheviks". Orwell.ru. Archived from the original on 29 June 2023. Retrieved 29 June 2023.
^ a b Rank, Michael (9 June 2013). "Orwell in China: Big Brother in every bookshop". The Asian Pacific Journal. Archived from the original on 1 July 2023. Retrieved 1 July 2023.
^ a b Hawkins, Amy; Wasserstrom, Jeffrey (13 January 2019). "Why 1984 Isn't Banned in China". The Atlantic. Archived from the original on 10 May 2020. Retrieved 15 August 2020.
^ Rodden, John. The Politics of Literary Reputation: The Making and Claiming of "St. George" Orwell.
^ Chao, Yen-hsiang (18 April 2025). "INTERVIEW/'Nineteen Eighty-Four' receives timely 1st Taiwanese translation". Central News Agency. Retrieved 21 April 2025. Republished as: "'Nineteen Eighty-Four' receives timely first Taiwanese translation". Taipei Times. 19 April 2025. Retrieved 21 April 2025.
^ Keyes, Ralph (2009). I Love It When You Talk Retro. St Martins. p. 222. ISBN 978-0-312-34005-6.
^ Rojas, Carlos (2016). "Time Out of Joint: Commemoration and Commodification of Socialism in Yan Lianke's Lenin's Kisses". In Li, Jie; Zhang, Enhua (eds.). Red Legacies in China: Cultural Afterlives of the Communist Revolution. Harvard Contemporary China Series. Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Asia Center. ISBN 978-0-674-73718-1.
^ "Justice Breyer warns of Orwellian government". The Hill. 8 November 2011. Archived from the original on 10 November 2011. Retrieved 9 November 2011.
^ '1984' sales skyrocket in wake of US spy scandal Archived 28 March 2014 at the Wayback Machine, Agence France-Presse, 11 June 2013. Retrieved 30 June 2013.
^ "Sales of Orwell's '1984' Increase as Details of NSA Scandal Emerge". ABC News. Archived from the original on 23 June 2013. Retrieved 29 December 2022.
^ "Sales Of '1984' Skyrocket In Wake Of NSA Scandal". HuffPost. 11 June 2013. Archived from the original on 29 December 2022. Retrieved 29 December 2022.
^ Kakutani, Michiko (26 January 2017). "Why '1984' Is a 2017 Must-Read". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 14 March 2021. Retrieved 26 January 2017.
^ Freytas-Tamura, Kimiko de (25 January 2017). "George Orwell's '1984' Is Suddenly a Best-Seller". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 17 February 2021. Retrieved 25 January 2017.
^ Rossman, Sean (25 January 2017). "George Orwell's '1984' leaps to top of Amazon bestseller list". USA Today. Archived from the original on 25 January 2017. Retrieved 25 January 2017.
^ a b "Kellyanne Conway's "Alternative Facts" Claim Sends '1984' Book Sales Soaring". The Hollywood Reporter. Associated Press. 24 January 2017. Archived from the original on 26 January 2017. Retrieved 25 January 2017.
^ "These Are The NYPL's Top Check Outs OF ALL TIME". Gothamist. 13 January 2020. Archived from the original on 13 January 2020. Retrieved 29 December 2022.
^ "Publication of George Orwell's Nineteen Eighty-Four | History Today". www.historytoday.com. Archived from the original on 4 April 2023. Retrieved 29 December 2022.
^ "George Orwell is out of copyright. What happens now?". The Guardian. 1 January 2021. Archived from the original on 29 December 2022. Retrieved 29 December 2022.
^ "1984 v. Brave New World". Letters of Note. 8 February 2020. Archived from the original on 8 February 2020. Retrieved 8 February 2020.
^ Purves, Libby (12 September 2015). "1984? Brave New World? Why I love a little dystopia". The Daily Telegraph. London. Archived from the original on 10 January 2022.
^ "January 2011". Juxtapoz. Archived from the original on 23 November 2015. Retrieved 28 February 2018.
^ "2011: A Brave New Dystopia: Chris Hedges". 27 December 2010. Archived from the original on 21 July 2017. Retrieved 6 December 2015.
^ "1984 vs. Brave New World: Comparison". Study.com. Archived from the original on 10 August 2017. Retrieved 6 December 2015.
^ "Brave New World Revisited (1958) by Aldous Huxley, pg. 36". Retrieved 27 March 2024.
^ "Brave New World Revisited (1958) by Aldous Huxley". www.huxley.net. Archived from the original on 30 January 2018. Retrieved 29 December 2022.
^ "Which Dystopian Novel Got It Right: Orwell's 1984 or Huxley's Brave New World?". The New York Times. 13 February 2017. Archived from the original on 15 June 2017. Retrieved 17 June 2017.
^ "Orwell's 1984 and Trump's America". The New Yorker. Archived from the original on 14 June 2017. Retrieved 17 June 2017.
^ Alex Hern (26 January 2017). "Forget Nineteen Eighty-Four. These five dystopias better reflect Trump's US". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 1 July 2017. Retrieved 17 June 2017.
^ "Dystopian Novels for Modern Times". Rebel Princess Reader. 3 February 2017. Retrieved 17 June 2017.[permanent dead link]
^ Wilmut, Roger; Grafton, Jimmy (1976). The Goon Show Companion: A History and Goonography. Robson Books. p. 56.
^ Stardust: The David Bowie Story, Henry Edwards and Tony Zanetta, 1986, McGraw-Hill Book Company, p. 220
^ Grimm, Beca (23 June 2017). "Flashback: David Bowie's Failed Attempt to Adapt George Orwell's '1984'". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on 7 April 2018. Retrieved 6 April 2018.
^ a b c "10 Songs Inspired by George Orwell's 1984". Paste magazine. Archived from the original on 6 June 2020. Retrieved 6 June 2020.
^ Friedman, Ted (2005). "Chapter 5: 1984". Electric Dreams: Computers in American Culture. New York University Press. ISBN 978-0-8147-2740-9. Archived from the original on 9 January 2019. Retrieved 6 October 2011.
^ "Apple's Macintosh, 25 years on". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 6 June 2020. Retrieved 6 June 2020.
^ Mulkern, Patrick (18 September 2011). "Doctor Who: The God Complex". Radio Times. Archived from the original on 15 September 2023. Retrieved 9 September 2023.
^ "Muse Discuss The Resistance, Their 'Very Personal' New Album" Archived 5 July 2012 at the Wayback Machine. MTV. Retrieved 19 October 2012
^ Manson, Marilyn (2012). The Long Hard Road Out of Hell. Harper Collins. p. 19.
^ Bastille – Back to the Future, archived from the original on 6 February 2022, retrieved 6 February 2022
^ "The Used - 1984 (Infinite jest)". YouTube. 23 April 2020.


### Cited references
Bowker, Gordon (2003). Inside George Orwell: A Biography. Palgrave Macmillan. ISBN 978-0-312-23841-4.
Lynskey, Dorian (2019). The Ministry of Truth: The Biography of George Orwell's 1984. Doubleday. ISBN 978-0-385-54406-1.
Meyers, Jeffery (2000). Orwell: Wintry Conscience of a Generation. W. W. Norton. ISBN 978-0-393-32263-7.
Orwell, George (2003a). Animal Farm and 1984. Christopher Hitchens (foreword) (1st ed.). HMH. ISBN 978-0-15-101026-4.
— (2003b). Nineteen Eighty-Four. Thomas Pynchon (foreword); Erich Fromm (afterword). Plume. ISBN 978-0-452-28423-4.
Shelden, Michael (1991). Orwell: The Authorised Biography. London: Heinemann. ISBN 978-0-434-69517-1.


## Further reading
Aubrey, Crispin; Chilton, Paul, eds. (1983). Nineteen Eighty-four in 1984: Autonomy, Control, and Communication (repr. ed.). London: Comedia Publishing Group. ISBN 978-0-906890-42-4.
Bloom, Harold, George Orwell's 1984 (2009), Facts on File, Inc. ISBN 978-1-4381-1468-2
Di Nucci, Ezio and Storrie, Stefan (editors), 1984 and Philosophy: Is Resistance Futile? (2018), Open Court Publishing Company. ISBN 978-0-8126-9985-2
Goldsmith, Jack and Nussbaum, Martha, On Nineteen Eighty-Four: Orwell and Our Future (2010), Princeton University Press. ISBN 978-1-4008-2664-3
Hillegas, Mark R. (1967). The Future as Nightmare: H. G. Wells and the Anti-Utopians. Southern Illinois University Press. ISBN 978-0-8093-0676-3
Howe, Irving, ed. (1983). 1984 Revisited: Totalitarianism in Our Century. New York: Harper Row. ISBN 978-0-06-080660-6.
Orwell, George (1949). Nineteen Eighty-Four. A novel. London: Secker & Warburg.
Orwell, George (1984). Davison, Peter (ed.). Nineteen Eighty-Four: The Facsimile Manuscript. London, United Kingdom: Secker & Warburg. ISBN 978-0-436-35022-1 – via Internet Archive.
Orwell, George (1977). 1984. Erich Fromm (foreword) (reissue ed.). Signet Classics. ISBN 978-0-451-52493-5.
Orwell, George. 1984 (Vietnamese edition), translation by Đặng Phương-Nghi, French preface by Bertrand Latour ISBN 978-0-9774224-5-6.
Plank, Robert, George Orwell's Guide Through Hell: A Psychological Study of 1984 (1994), Borgo Pres. ISBN 978-0-89370-413-1
Smith, David; Mosher, Michael (1984). Orwell for Beginners (1st ed.). [London], England: Writers and Readers Pub. Cooperative. ISBN 978-0-86316-066-0.
Steinhoff, William R. (1975). George Orwell and the Origins of 1984. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press. ISBN 978-0-472-87400-2.
Taylor, D. J. On Nineteen Eighty-Four: A Biography (2019), Abrams. ISBN 978-1-68335-684-4
Tuccille, Jerome (1975). Who's Afraid of 1984? The case for optimism in looking ahead to the 1980s. New Rochelle, New York: Arlington House Publishers. ISBN 978-0-87000-308-0 – via Internet Archive.
Waddell, Nathan (editor), The Cambridge Companion to Nineteen Eighty-Four (2020), Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-1-108-84109-2
West, W. J. (1992). The Larger Evils—Nineteen Eighty-Four: The Truth Behind the Satire. Edinburgh: Canongate Press. ISBN 978-0-86241-382-8.


## External links
Definitions from Wiktionary
Media from Commons
Quotations from Wikiquote
Textbooks from Wikibooks
Data from Wikidata
Nineteen Eighty-Four at the Internet Book List
Nineteen Eighty-Four (Archived 8 May 2022 at the Wayback Machine) at the British Library
Nineteen Eighty-Four at the Open Library
Nineteen Eighty-Four title listing at the Internet Speculative Fiction Database
1953 Theatre Guild on the Air radio adaptation at the Internet Archive
Historian Sarah Wise on the London of Nineteen Eighty-Four on the London Fictions website
Asimov, Isaac (1980). "Review of 1984". The New Yorker.


### Electronic editions
1984 (Nineteen Eighty-Four) at Faded Page (Canada)
George Orwell—Eric Arthur Blair
Project Gutenberg Australia (e-text)
HTML and EPUB editions from The University of Adelaide Library
Nineteen Eighty-Four (Canadian public domain Ebook – PDF)


### Film versions
1984 (50 minutes) on YouTube, adapted by William Templeton, directed by Paul Nickell, with Eddie Albert as Winston, Norma Crane as Julia, and Lorne Greene as O'Brien; Westinghouse Studio One, CBS (1953)
v
t
e
Winston Smith
Julia
O'Brien
Big Brother
Emmanuel Goldstein
Political geography
Ministries
Thought Police
Newspeak
Doublespeak
Doublethink
Groupthink
2 + 2 = 5
Thoughtcrime
Telescreen
Memory hole
The Theory and Practice of Oligarchical Collectivism
Two Minutes Hate
Hate Week
1956 film
1984 film
2023 film
US program
UK programme
2005 opera
2013 play
In popular media
1985 (Burgess novel)
1985 (Dalos novel)
The Ministry of Truth (Lynskey book)
George Orwell on Screen
"1984" (advertisement)
Room 101 radio series British TV series Australian TV series
radio series
British TV series
Australian TV series
Orwell: 2+2=5
Category
v
t
e
Burmese Days (1934)
A Clergyman's Daughter (1935)
Keep the Aspidistra Flying (1936)
Coming Up for Air (1939)
Animal Farm (1945)
Nineteen Eighty-Four (1949)
Down and Out in Paris and London (1933)
The Road to Wigan Pier (1937)
Homage to Catalonia (1938)
"A Hanging" (1931)
"The Spike" (1931)
"Bookshop Memories" (1936)
"Shooting an Elephant" (1936)
"Spilling the Spanish Beans" (1937)
"Boys' Weeklies" (1940)
"Inside the Whale" (1940)
"My Country Right or Left" (1940)
"The Art of Donald McGill" (1941)
"England Your England" (1941)
"The Lion and the Unicorn" (1941)
"Poetry and the Microphone" (1943)
"Raffles and Miss Blandish" (1944)
"Good Bad Books" (1945)
"Notes on Nationalism" (1945)
"The Sporting Spirit" (1945)
"Lear, Tolstoy and the Fool" (1947)
"The English People" (1947)
"Toward European Unity" (1947)
"Reflections on Gandhi" (1949)
"Books v. Cigarettes" (1946)
"Confessions of a Book Reviewer" (1946)
"Decline of the English Murder" (1946)
"A Good Word for the Vicar of Bray" (1946)
"How the Poor Die" (1946)
"The Moon Under Water" (1946)
"A Nice Cup of Tea" (1946)
"Pleasure Spots" (1946)
"Politics and the English Language" (1946)
"The Politics of Starvation" (1946)
"Politics vs. Literature: An Examination of Gulliver's Travels" (1946)
"The Prevention of Literature" (1946)
"Riding Down from Bangor" (1946)
"Second Thoughts on James Burnham" (1946)
"Some Thoughts on the Common Toad" (1946)
"Why I Write" (1946)
"Such, Such Were the Joys" (1952)
"As I Please" (1943–1947)
"London Letters" (1941–1946)
Betrayal of the Left (1941)
Inside the Whale and Other Essays (1940)
Critical Essays (1946)
Orwellian
Searchlight Books
Secker and Warburg
Victor Gollancz Ltd
Eileen O'Shaughnessy
Sonia Orwell
Orwell's list (1949)
Eric & Us
Why Orwell Matters
Orwell Award
Orwell Prize
The Orwell Foundation
Statue
VIAF
FAST
Germany
United States
France
BnF data
Japan
Australia
Czech Republic
Croatia
Israel
IdRef
MusicBrainz work
Yale LUX


URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Earth_Abides
Content:

Earth Abides is a 1949 American post-apocalyptic science fiction novel by George R. Stewart. It tells the story of the fall of civilization from deadly disease and the emergence of a new culture with simpler tools. Set in the 1940s in Berkeley, California, the story is told by Isherwood Williams, who emerges from isolation in the mountains only to discover that almost everyone had died.
Earth Abides won the inaugural International Fantasy Award in 1951. It was included in Locus magazine's list of best All Time Science Fiction in 1987 and 1998[2] and was a nominee to be entered into the Prometheus Hall of Fame some time before 2002.[3]


## Plot


### "Part I: World Without End"
While working on his graduate thesis in geography in the Sierra Nevada, Ish is bitten by a rattlesnake. As he heals from the bite in a cabin, he gets sick with a disease similar to measles, and he lapses in and out of consciousness. He eventually recovers and makes his way back to civilization, only to discover that it has collapsed after most people have died from the same disease. He decides to go to his home in Berkeley, California. In the city near his home Ish meets a few survivors and also encounters a friendly and eager dog, which he names Princess, who swiftly adopts Ish as her new master. He sets out on a cross-country tour, traveling all the way to New York City and back, scavenging for food and fuel as he goes. As he travels, he finds small groups of survivors, but has doubts about humanity's ability to survive the loss of civilization.
Ish returns to his home in California. After reading Ecclesiastes, he realizes that he had been throwing his life away. He finds an African American woman, Emma, living nearby and they agree to consider themselves married and have children. They are gradually joined by other survivors. Over time the electricity (which had been provided by automated hydro power station) fails and the comforts of civilization recede. As the children grow, Ish tries to instill basic academics by teaching reading, writing, arithmetic, and geography, but he is largely unsuccessful due to a lack of interest by the others.
Many children are born in these years, including Joey, Ish's youngest and favorite son. Joey is very similar in nature to Ish, as he demonstrates innate intelligence and a curiosity about the world before the epidemic. This leads Ish to believe that Joey is the key to the future.


### "Part II: The Year 22"
Twenty-two years later, the community is flourishing, with the young adapting easily to the de-modernised world. They come to have a better grasp of the natural world than the adults, and when running water fails, the younger generation comes to the rescue, knowing where flowing streams may be found. Ish turns his attention from ecology to his newly forming society, and he notices that the children are becoming very superstitious. One day, Ish asks for his hammer which he habitually carries around, and finds the children are afraid to touch it as it is a symbol to them of the old times; the long-dead "Americans" of the old world are now viewed like gods, including Ish.
The older boys return from a cross country trip with a stranger named Charlie, who exposes the tribe to typhoid fever which kills many, including Joey. Through his despair, Ish is forced to face the future with a different set of expectations and hopes. His ambition to restore civilization to its original state is replaced by a more modest, practical one to simply convey a few basic survival skills, such as making bows and arrows, which the children think are great playthings.
As the years go by, the community begins to grow corn. Ish presides at meetings, his hammer being a symbol of his status. Though he is respected, many of his ideas are ignored by the younger men.


### "Part III: The Last American"
Ish spends most of his elderly life in a mental "fog", unaware of the world. Occasionally the fog in his mind lifts. During one such time, he finds himself aware of his great-grandson Jack, who stands before him. Jack tells him that the bow and arrow have become more reliable than the gun, whose cartridges do not always work. Jack also mentions that the differently colored arrowheads that he has made, unbeknownst to him, from several coin denominations are suitable for hunting different game. Ish finds this belief superstitious, but decides it would be futile to challenge it. Ish realizes that the former civilization is now completely gone and will not be rebuilt anytime soon. He becomes reconciled to the way things have changed. When Ish is dying, the younger men insist that his hammer be passed on. Ish chooses Jack.


## Characters
Isherwood Williams (Ish) is a graduate student at Berkeley, studying the geography of an area in the mountains, somewhere in California. He is sometimes referred to in the book as "The Last American." Ish becomes the leader of the community, aka "the tribe", he believes due to his intellect.
Emma (Em) is a woman who Isherwood meets in his hometown. The author may have been taking a chance with this character, who is, at least partially, African-American,[4] while Isherwood is white; when the book was written, interracial marriages were heavily discouraged in American society.[5] Isherwood does marry her, and race is unimportant to the couple's relationship. Em becomes the community's mother, letting it grow as it will, but stepping in to help when no one else is filling the leadership role. She is the adult while others panic, and Ish thinks of her as the "Mother of Nations".[6] In her old age, she disagrees with Ish about a request by a smaller community, known as the Others, to join the Tribe. Ish initially opposes the idea, but Em supports it, and Ish changes his mind.
Ezra meets Emma and Ish while traveling through Berkeley, he was a former liquor salesman and immigrant from Yorkshire, England. They liked him, but feared the complications of a love triangle, so they encouraged him to leave. He returned with Molly and Jean, his wives.[7] Ish values Ezra as a good judge of people, saying "Ezra knew people, Ezra liked people."
George is a carpenter by trade. George is not intellectually intelligent but becomes a Jack-of-all-trades able to build, repair or maintain the limited infrastructure of the small community.
Evie is a "half grown girl" who Ezra found living "in squalor and solitude." She appears to have a mental illness, and the others all care and provide for her.[8] Evie grows into an attractive young woman but the tribe has a rule, that as the children grow no one will marry her—she wouldn't understand, and her mental condition could possibly be hereditary.
Joey is the youngest son of Ish and Em. Of all the children in the Tribe, he is the only one that truly understands the academic skills that Ish tries to teach — geometry, reading, geography. He dies during the typhoid fever outbreak.
Charlie is a stranger who arrives from Los Angeles after two of the "boys" (the second generation) make a scouting expedition in a refurbished Jeep to see what is left of America. Immediately upon his arrival Ish and Ezra become suspicious about Charlie and the type of person he might be. Their suspicions are confirmed a day later when Charlie sets his eye on Evie. He also reveals to Ezra after drinking heavily that he has had many of "Cupid's" diseases. Ish confronts Charlie about Evie, Charlie is disrespectful and challenges Ish's authority as leader. It is revealed that Charlie carries a concealed pistol and his behavior reveals himself as someone who was probably a violent criminal before the epidemic. As a result, Ish, Em, Ezra and George debate what to do about Charlie for the safety of the community, exile or execution. Charlie is the carrier of the typhoid epidemic that infects the community.
Jack is Ish's great-grandson. He is a young man who hunts with arrows he makes himself. Jack is confident, intelligent and a potential leader, and Ish sees something of Joey in him, although he has beliefs which to Ish seem superstitious and naive. Like others of his generation, Jack believes Ish's old hammer is something very important for the Tribe. He risks his life by going into a burning house to retrieve the hammer. Later, as Ish is dying, the young men want to know who the hammer will now belong to, and Ish chooses Jack.


## Major themes


### Biological controls on population
On the title page, Stewart immediately starts with the theme, quoting Ecclesiastes 1:4 — "Men go and come, but earth abides." The first half of Earth Abides has the major theme that humans have no privileged place in nature and are not immune to nature's built-in population controls. The main character, a geographer, states it plainly, "When anything gets too numerous it's likely to get hit by some plague".[9]
On the first page, Stewart tells readers how contagion could bring the end very quickly for mankind:
"If a killing type of virus strain should suddenly arise by mutation... it could, because of the rapid transportation in which we indulge nowadays, be carried to the far corners of the earth and cause the deaths of millions of people." W. M. Stanley, in Chemical and Engineering News, December 22, 1947.[10]
Within a few pages, he makes it clear that basic biology also applies to humans:
"Some zoologists have even suggested a biological law: that the number of individuals in a species never remains constant, but always rises and falls—the higher the animal and the slower its breeding-rate, the longer its period of fluctuation [...] As for man, there is little reason to think that he can in the long run escape the fate of other creatures, and if there is a biological law of flux and reflux, his situation is now a highly perilous one....Biologically, man has for too long a time been rolling an uninterrupted run of sevens."[11]


### Effects of smaller population
Reviewer Noel Perrin has pointed out that Stewart had written two books before this, in which the main character was not a person, but "a natural force." In Storm the main character is weather, and in Fire, a forest fire takes center stage.[12]
In the same way, Stewart centers the first half of Earth Abides on the forces of natural and artificial selection. In freeing the landscape from humans, half of the book is devoted to looking at how the world would change in their absence. Stewart chose to make his main human character an ecologist, and sends him on a cross-country tour, to see what the world is like without people. As animals and plants no longer have humans taking care of them or controlling them, they are free to breed uncontrolled and to prey upon one another. The main character sees that some have been under humans so long that they are helpless in the face of change, while others are still able to adapt and survive. Stewart shows that humans have routinely influenced the lives of almost every plant and animal around them.
Another theme of the book is what happens to human skills as the population decreases. Reviewer Lionel Shriver points out this theme in an article about literature which features human extinction:
But as Stewart tracks three post-plague generations, he vividly demonstrates that advanced civilisation depends on numbers. Reduce the race to the size of a small town and how many residents will remember how to make plastic? The last Americans plunder canned goods (with little respect for sell-by dates), and literacy atrophies; electrical and water systems break down. At length, the community reverts to its hunter-gatherer forebears.[13]
Stewart uses the second half of his book to show that, if humans are reduced to low numbers, it will be difficult for them to continue civilization as we know it. Reading becomes a casualty.
The society is so small that the death of one member—a little boy named Joey—seems likely to determine for many generations to come whether the emerging society will or won't be literate...As Ish thinks of it, each new baby is a candle lit against the dark.[12]
If skills and customs don't work in the new situation, these die out, or those holding them do. Children adapt naturally to the new situation, and immediately useful customs and skills are more interesting to them than reading and writing. The information in libraries is useless within a generation.
One custom that Stewart predicts could die out is racism. When there are fewer partners to choose from, mankind will not be able to afford to be too choosy in picking one's partner.
Another issue he brings up is how law and order will function, when the lawmakers, courts and enforcers are all gone. Even laws won't be immune to the pressure to survive. One of the characters in the book point out, "What laws?" when they have to determine the fate of an outsider. Stewart shows how people may come to worry about potential harm rather than justice when dealing with outsiders.


### Biblical theme: replenishing the Earth
A 1949 book review says that Earth Abides parallels two biblical stories that shows mankind spreading out and populating the world:
...the dual themes are as old as Genesis...Not a flood but a swift and deadly new disease wipes out all but a few of the human race. Ish (for "Isherwood") is the Noah of this "Great Disaster." As material civilization begins to crumble, Ish gradually devolves into a kind of Adam who, inevitably, finds his Eve, Em (For "Emma"), a level-headed lady with Negro blood, and nature takes its time-worn course. Em is hailed by Ish as "The Mother of Nations."[14]
According to one reviewer, there is another tale of the fall of civilization that George R. Stewart could have taken account of, the story of Ishi, believed, at the time Stewart was writing, to be the last of his tribe, who lived at Berkeley, where Stewart later taught. Ish is very similar to Ishi, and it also means "man", in the language of a man whose whole tribe was dead. Ishi's story parallels the Genesis and Earth Abides stories, telling of one who has to adapt to a changed world.[15]


## Genre and style
Earth Abides belongs to the subgenre of apocalyptic science fiction featuring a universal plague that nearly wipes out humanity. Other examples include Mary Shelley's The Last Man (1826), Jack London's The Scarlet Plague (1912), Michael Crichton's The Andromeda Strain (1969), and Stephen King's The Stand (1978).[16]
Earth Abides also fits into the "post-apocalyptic" subgenre. It was published in 1949, four years after the end of World War II and in the earliest stages of the Cold War. It predates many similar novels including Alas, Babylon (1959), A Canticle for Leibowitz (1960), and The Last Ship[17] (1988). It is itself predated, however by The Machine Stops (1909) and René Barjavel's Ashes, Ashes (Ravage, 1943), among others.
As one reviewer notes, "there are no mutants, no warring tribes. I think the most refreshing aspect of this classic novel is just how human an approach Stewart applied to this story."[18]


## Reception
According to WorldCat, there have been 28 editions[19] of Earth Abides published in English. The book has been in print in every decade from 1949 to 2008.
James Sallis, writing in 2003 in the Boston Globe:
This is a book, mind you, that I'd place not only among the greatest science fiction but among our very best novels. Each time I read it, I'm profoundly affected, affected in a way only the greatest art — Ulysses, Matisse or Beethoven symphonies, say — affects me. Epic in sweep, centering on the person of Isherwood Williams, Earth Abides proves a kind of antihistory, relating the story of humankind backwards, from ever-more-abstract civilization to stone-age primitivism.[20]
Astounding reviewer P. Schuyler Miller identified the novel as one of the first regarding "a young and little understood science, the science of ecology." Miller praised Stewart for "the intricacy of detail with which he has worked out his problem in ecology" and for writing "quietly, with very few peaks of melodrama as seem necessary in much popular fiction."[21]
It was mentioned in a serious overview of modern science fiction, Contemporary Science Fiction by August Derleth, in the January 1952 edition of College English. Derleth called it an "excellent example" of the "utopian theme" of "rebuilding after a holocaust leaving but few survivors."
It was described as a persuasive answer to the question, "What is man," in the October, 1973 edition of Current Anthropology. The article "Anthropology and Science Fiction" [22] examines the nature of Science Fiction and its relationship to understanding people. The magazine concluded of Earth Abides that it shows ..."man is man, be he civilized or tribal. Stewart shows us that a tribal hunting culture is just as valid and real to its members as civilization is to us."
In the American Quarter article California's Literary Regionalism, Autumn 1955, Stewart is seen as a "humanist in the old classical sense. His novels, Storm, Fire, East of the Giants, Earth Abides, demonstrate the complex interlocking of topography, climate, and human society; and their general tone is objective and optimistic."


## Adaptations
In November 1950, the book was adapted for the CBS radio program Escape as a two-part drama starring John Dehner.[23] A television adaptation was released by Amazon MGM Studios in December 2024.[24]


## References to other works
The book makes a reference to Robinson Crusoe and The Swiss Family Robinson. Ish compares the situations within these books to what he is going through. He finds Robinson Crusoe less appealing, because "his religious preoccupations seemed boring and rather silly".[25] He looks at the ship in The Swiss Family Robinson as an "infinite grab-bag from which at any time they might take exactly what they wanted,"[26] which is similar to the situation of those living after the Great Disaster.


## Legacy and homages
Stephen King has stated that Earth Abides was an inspiration for his post-apocalyptic novel The Stand.[27]
Composer Philip Aaberg wrote a piece of music, titled "Earth Abides", inspired by the novel. The piece was originally written as part of a sound track commissioned by the National Geographic Society for a documentary on the Earth. The track can be found on the Windham Hill CD "A Winter's Solstice III" (track 15).[28]
Jimi Hendrix claimed that Earth Abides was his favorite book and his song "Third Stone from the Sun" is inspired by the novel.[29]
Earth Abides was an influence on the 2013 post-apocalyptic video game The Last of Us, and a character is seen reading the novel in "The Price", a 2025 episode of the game's TV adaptation.[30]


## Footnotes
^ Graham Sleight. "Yesterday's Tomorrows: Arthur C. Clarke and George R. Stewart". Retrieved March 7, 2008.
^ Locus Magazine. "The Locus Index to SF Awards: Locus All-Time Poll Nominees List". Archived from the original on August 15, 2010. Retrieved March 4, 2008.
^ Libertarian Futurist Society. "Prometheus Hall of Fame Nominees". Archived from the original on May 2, 2006. Retrieved March 4, 2008.
^ Keith Phipps. "The Box Of Paperbacks Book Club: Earth Abides by George R. Stewart (1949)". The A.V. Club. Archived from the original on May 13, 2008. Retrieved February 28, 2008.
^ D. D. Shade. "Lost Book Archives, Earth Abides by George R. Stewart". Archived from the original on February 1, 2008. Retrieved February 28, 2008.
^ Stewart, George R. (1969). Earth Abides. Boston: Houghton Mifflin. pp. 295–299.
^ Stewart, George R. (1969). Earth Abides. Boston: Houghton Mifflin. pp. 142–145.
^ Stewart, George R. (1969). Earth Abides. Boston: Houghton Mifflin. p. 144.
^ Stewart, George R. (1969). Earth Abides. Boston: Houghton Mifflin. p. 125.
^ Stewart, George R. (1969). Earth Abides. Boston: Houghton Mifflin. p. 1.
^ Stewart, George R. (1969). Earth Abides. Boston: Houghton Mifflin. pp. 8–9.
^ a b Perrin, Noel (Spring 2003). "unlisted title". American Scholar. 72 (2). Gale Document Number: A101175935: Gale: 109. Retrieved March 19, 2008.{{cite journal}}: CS1 maint: location (link)
^ Shriver, Lionel (June 10, 2002). "Population doomsday". New Statesman. 131 (4591). EBSCO Host Academic Search Premier: 38. Retrieved March 19, 2008.
^ Bell, Eric T. (December 1949). "Books: Earth Abides by George R. Stewart. Random House, Inc. New York" (PDF). Engineering and Science Monthly. XIII (3). Pasadena, California: California Institute of Technology: 3–4. Retrieved March 15, 2008.
^ Dodds, Georges T. "George R. Stewart". Retrieved June 12, 2007.
^ Rosen, Elizabeth K. Apocalyptic Transformation: Apocalypse and the Postmodern Imagination. Lanham, Maryland: Lexington Books, 2008: 69. ISBN 978-0739117903
^ Ken Sanes. "False utopias of simulation and technology". Retrieved February 23, 2008.
^ Rob L. Bedford. "Official sffworld.com Book Review: Earth Abides by George Rippey Stewart (2006-06-06)". Archived from the original on October 20, 2008. Retrieved February 23, 2008.
^ "2205195". WorldCat.
^ "Sallis, James."Earth Abides: Stewart's dark eulogy for humankind," Boston Globe, February 16. 2003". Archived from the original on November 1, 2006. Retrieved December 6, 2006.
^ "Book Reviews", Astounding, October 1950, pp. 129–130
^ Stover, Leon. "Anthropology and Science Fiction." Current Anthropology 14:4(471–474).
^ "Classic Radio for November 5, 2022 Hour 1 - Earth Abides Part 1".
^ Vardhan, Harsh (February 6, 2024). "Earth Abides Adaptation in the Works at Amazon MGM Studios". The Cinemaholic. Retrieved February 6, 2024.
^ Stewart, George R. (1969). Earth Abides. Boston: Houghton Mifflin. p. 90.
^ Stewart, George R. (1969). Earth Abides. Boston: Houghton Mifflin. pp. 90–91.
^ Dodds, Georges T. "George R. Stewart" (sidebar). Retrieved June 12, 2007.
^ Scott, Donald (2012). The Life and Truth of George R. Stewart: A Literary Biography of the Author. McFarland. p. 195. ISBN 978-0786490530.
^ McDermott, John; Kramer, Eddie; Cox, Billy (2009). Ultimate Hendrix. New York City: Backbeat Books. p. 26. ISBN 978-0879309381.
^ Baker, Troy; Mazin, Craig; Druckmann, Neil; Gross, Halley (May 18, 2025). "The Price". HBO's The Last of Us Podcast (Podcast). HBO. Archived from the original on May 19, 2025. Retrieved May 19, 2025.


## References
Bedford, Robert H. (June 6, 2006). "Earth Abides by George Rippey Stewart". SFFWorld.com. Archived from the original on October 20, 2008. Retrieved March 4, 2008.
Dodds, Georges T. (2000). "Earth Abides by George R. Stewart, The Purple Cloud by M. P. Shiel". SF Site. Retrieved June 12, 2007.
efc.com. "Emancipation (Episode 303)". Earth Final Conflict, Episode Guide. Tribune Interactive. Archived from the original on March 9, 2008. Retrieved February 25, 2008.
LeBlanc, Lucy (June 26, 2006). "Cover Evolution". Autumn Leaves. Retrieved February 24, 2008.
Libertarian Futurist Society. "Prometheus Hall of Fame Nominees". Locus Magazine. Archived from the original on May 2, 2006. Retrieved March 4, 2008.
Locus Magazine. "The Locus Index to SF Awards: Locus All-Time Poll Nominees List". Locus Magazine. Archived from the original on August 15, 2010. Retrieved March 4, 2008.
Sallis, James (February 16, 2003). "Earth Abides: Stewart's dark eulogy for humankind". The Boston Globe. Archived from the original on November 1, 2006. Retrieved December 6, 2006.
Mason, Justin (July 27, 2004). "Post-Apocalyptic Fiction". Justin Mason's Weblog. Archived from the original on February 24, 2008. Retrieved February 23, 2008.
Phipps, Keith (February 21, 2008). "The Box Of Paperbacks Book Club: Earth Abides by George R. Stewart (1949)". AVclub.com. Retrieved February 28, 2008.
Sanes, Ken. "False utopias of simulation and technology". www.transparencynow.com. Retrieved February 23, 2008.
Shade, D. D. (June 11, 1998). "Earth Abides by George R. Stewart". Lost Books Archives. Archived from the original on February 1, 2008. Retrieved February 28, 2008.
Stein, David E. S., Rabbi (August 5, 2006). "What Does It Mean to Be a "Man"? The Noun 'ish in Biblical Hebrew: A Reconsideration" (PDF). The Contemporary Torah: A Gender-Sensitive Adaptation of the JPS Translation. Jewish Publication Society. Archived from the original (PDF) on February 19, 2009. Retrieved February 28, 2008.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list (link)
Stewart, George R. (1969). Earth Abides. Boston: Houghton Mifflin Company.


## External links
Boston Globe review by James Sallis Archived 2006-11-01 at the Wayback Machine
Review by Rich Cross at Survivors: A World Away
Review and Discussion on We Read Science Fiction Archived 2009-03-16 at the Wayback Machine #3 All-Time Best Science Fiction Novel
A large version of the painting by Robert Abbett for the 1962 Ace Books cover. Archived 2009-02-06 at the Wayback Machine
Two versions of the painting for the Ace Books cover and blurbs about the book
Earth Abides book covers
Art Elliot, Earth Abides EP
George R. Stewart weblog by Stewart biographer Donald M. Scott
Earth Abides title listing at the Internet Speculative Fiction Database


### Audio
Escape "Earth Abides" Part One and Two (November 5, 1950 and November 12, 1950)


URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Martian_Chronicles
Content:

The Martian Chronicles is a science fiction fix-up novel, published in 1950, by American writer Ray Bradbury that chronicles the exploration and settlement of Mars, the home of indigenous Martians, by Americans leaving a troubled Earth that is eventually devastated by nuclear war.


## Synopsis
The book projects American society immediately after World War II into a technologically advanced future where the amplification of humanity's potentials to create and destroy have miraculous and devastating consequences. Events in the chronicle include the apocalyptic destruction of Martian and human civilizations, instigated by humans, though there are no stories with settings at the catastrophes. The outcomes of many stories raise concerns about the values and direction of America of the time by addressing militarism, science, technology, and war-time prosperity that could result in a global nuclear war (e.g., "There Will Come Soft Rains" and "The Million-Year Picnic"); depopulation that might be considered genocide (e.g., "The Third Expedition", "—And the Moon Be Still as Bright", and "The Musicians"); racial oppression and exploitation (e.g., "Way in the Middle of the Air"); ahistoricism, philistinism, and hostility towards religion (e.g., "—And the Moon Be Still as Bright"); and censorship and conformity (e.g., "Usher II"). On Bradbury's award of a Pulitzer Prize Special Citation in 2007, the book was recognized as one of his "masterworks that readers carry with them over a lifetime".[2]


## Structure and plot summary


### Fix-up structure
The Martian Chronicles is a fix-up novel consisting of published short stories along with new short bridge narratives in the form of interstitial vignettes, intercalary chapters, or expository narratives. The published stories were revised for consistency and refinement.[2][3]
Bradbury did not write The Martian Chronicles as a singular work: Its creation as a novel was suggested to Bradbury by a publisher's editor years after most of the stories had first appeared in different publications (see publication history and original publication notes under Contents). In responding to the suggestion, the 29-year-old Bradbury remembers saying: "Oh, my God ... I read Winesburg, Ohio by Sherwood Anderson when I was 24 and I said to myself, 'Oh God, wouldn't it be wonderful if someday I could write a book as good as this but put it on the planet Mars.'"[4] (See the Influences section on literary influences affecting the work's structure.)


### Chronicle structure
The Martian Chronicles is written as a chronicle, each story presented as a chapter within an overall chronological ordering of the plot. Overall, it can be viewed as three extended episodes or parts, punctuated by two apocalyptic events. Events in the book's original edition ranged from 1999 to 2026. As 1999 approached in real life, the dates were advanced by 31 years in the 1997 edition. The summary that follows includes the dates of both editions.
The first part, covering two and a half years, from January 1999/2030 to June 2001/2032, consists of seven chapters about four exploratory missions from the United States, during which humans and Martians discover each other. The efforts of Martians to repel the human explorers ends in catastrophe when chicken pox brought to Mars by humans kills almost all Martians. Two of the chapters are original works for the fix-up.
The second part covers four and a half years, from August 2001/2032 to December 2005/2036, and consists of sixteen chapters in the first edition and seventeen in the 1997 edition. It is about the human colonizers of Mars, including human contact with the few surviving Martians, the preoccupation of the emigrants with making Mars like America on Earth, and the return of all settlers but seven to Earth as war on Earth threatens. All of the settlers are from the United States, and the settlements are administered by the United States government. A global war on Earth ensues, and contact between Mars and Earth ends. Eleven of the chapters are original works for the first edition and thirteen for the 1997 edition.
The third part, covering six months from April 2026/2057 to October 2026/2057, is three chapters about the remaining Martian settlers and the occurrence and aftermath of global nuclear war on Earth that eliminates human civilization there, and the few humans who manage to flee Earth and settle on Mars. None of the chapters are original works for the fix-up.


## Publication history
The creation of The Martian Chronicles by weaving together previous works was suggested to the author by New York City representatives of Doubleday & Company in 1949 after Norman Corwin recommended Bradbury travel to the city to be "'discovered'".[5] The work was subsequently published in hardbound form by Doubleday in the United States in 1950. Publication of the book was concurrent with the publication of Bradbury's short story, "There Will Come Soft Rains" that appeared in Collier's magazine. The short story appears as a chapter in the novel, though with some differences. The novel has been reprinted numerous times by many different publishers since 1950.
The Spanish language version of The Martian Chronicles, Crónicas Marcianas, was published in Argentina concurrently with the U.S. first edition, and included all the chapters contained in the U.S. edition. The edition included a foreword by Jorge Luis Borges.
The book was published in the United Kingdom under the title The Silver Locusts (1951), with slightly different contents. In some editions the story "The Fire Balloons" was added, and the story "Usher II" was removed to make room for it.[6]
The book was published in 1963 as part of the Time Reading Program with an introduction by Fred Hoyle.
In 1979, Bantam Books published a trade paperback edition with illustrations by Ian Miller.
As 1999 approached, the fictional future written into the first edition was in jeopardy, so the work was revised and a 1997 edition was published to advance all of the dates by 31 years (with the plot running from 2030 to 2057 instead of 1999 to 2026). The 1997 edition added "November 2033: The Fire Balloons" and "May 2034: The Wilderness", and omitted "Way in the Middle of the Air", a story considered less topical in 1997 than 1950.
The 1997 edition of Crónicas Marcianas included the same revisions as the U.S. 1997 edition.
In 2009, the Subterranean Press and PS Publishing published The Martian Chronicles: The Complete Edition that included the 1997 edition of the work and additional stories under the title "The Other Martian Tales".[7] (See The Other Martian Tales section of this article.)


## Contents
Bradbury culled the table of contents for The Martian Chronicles "Chronology" with each item formatted with the date of the story followed by a colon followed by the story title. The title of each chapter in the first edition was the corresponding line in "Chronology". In the 1997 edition, chapter titles omitted the colons by printing the date and the story title on separate lines. The chapter titles that follow are formatted consistent with the "Chronology". The years are those appearing in the first edition followed by the year appearing in 1997 edition.
Publication information concerning short stories published prior to their appearance in The Martian Chronicles is available in Ray Bradbury short fiction bibliography.


### January 1999/2030: Rocket Summer
First appeared in The Martian Chronicles. Not to be confused with the short story of the same name published in 1947.
"Rocket Summer" is a short vignette that describes the rocket launch of the first human expedition to Mars on a cold winter day in Ohio.


### February 1999/2030: Ylla
First published as "I'll Not Ask for Wine" in Maclean's, January 1, 1950.
Ylla, an unhappily married Martian, who, like all Martians, has telepathy, receives an impression of the human space traveler Nathaniel York. Ylla sings the 17th century song "Drink to Me Only with Thine Eyes" (with lyrics from the poem "To Celia" by Ben Jonson), in English she does not understand. She has a romantic dream involving him, in which he takes her back to Earth. Her jealous husband, Yll, kills York and her memories fade.


### August 1999/2030: The Summer Night
First published as "The Spring Night" in The Arkham Sampler, winter 1949.
An idyllic Martian summer night is disrupted when Martian adults and children spontaneously start to sing the words from English poems and children's rhymes they do not understand, including Lord Byron's "She Walks in Beauty" and "Old Mother Hubbard". The music, poems and rhymes emanate from astronauts aboard the Second Expedition's spaceship heading towards Mars. The Martians are terrified and sense that a terrible event will occur the next morning.


### August 1999/2030: The Earth Men
First published in Thrilling Wonder Stories, August 1948.
The Second Expedition encounters members of a Martian community not far from their landing site. The Earth explorers, mistaken for delusional Martians, find themselves locked up in an insane asylum. A psychologist judges them to be incurably deluded and kills them, then kills himself in the belief that he too has gone insane.


### March 2000/2031: The Taxpayer
First appeared in The Martian Chronicles.
A man named Pritchard believes he is entitled to be in the crew of the Third Expedition because he is a taxpayer. He does not want to be left on Earth because "there's going to be an atomic war."


### April 2000/2031: The Third Expedition
First published as "Mars is Heaven!" in Planet Stories, fall 1948. The original short story was set in 1960. The story in The Martian Chronicles contains paragraph about medical treatments that slow the aging process, so that the characters can be traveling to Mars in 2000 but still remember the 1920s.
The Third Expedition find themselves lulled into a collective hallucination by the Martians and then killed by them. The ending leaves it ambiguous whether this was the plan of the Martians all along, or, given the telepathic origins of the hallucination and the way it was molded to their expectations and desires, Captain John Black accidentally willed it into being by coming to believe the hallucination was a trap for those perceived as invaders.


### June 2001/2032: —And the Moon Be Still as Bright
First published in Thrilling Wonder Stories, June 1948.
The Fourth Expedition lands on the opposite side of Mars and finds all the Martians dead, having contracted and been killed by chicken pox inadvertently introduced by the previous expeditions. Crew member Jeff Spender becomes repelled by the others' ugly American attitudes as they explore a dead Martian city and begins to kill the others to ensure no further human incursions ruin Mars.


### August 2001/2032: The Settlers
First appeared in The Martian Chronicles.
"The Settlers" is a vignette that describes the "Lonely Ones", the first settlers of Mars, single men from the United States who are few in number.


### December 2001/2032: The Green Morning
First appeared in The Martian Chronicles.
Benjamin Driscoll is an emigrant who faces the prospect of having to return to Earth because he has difficulty breathing in the thin Martian atmosphere. Driscoll believes Mars can be made more hospitable by planting trees to enrich the air with oxygen, and is stunned to see the seeds he has planted grow into a fully mature forest overnight. Referencing this story, Driscoll Forest is a place named in "The Naming of Names".


### February 2002/2033: The Locusts
First appeared in The Martian Chronicles.
A vignette describing the arrival of ninety thousand American emigrants to Mars.


### August 2002/2033: Night Meeting
First appeared in The Martian Chronicles.
"Night Meeting" is the story of Tomás Gomez, a young Latino construction worker on Mars, who drives his truck across an empty expanse between towns to attend a party, and his encounters along the way with an elderly gas station owner and a Martian who appears to him as a phantom. They each regard each other as a dream.
The fearless Tomás Gomez reflects a common Mexican attitude toward death, which Bradbury understood. Prior to the publication of The Martian Chronicles in 1950, two of his short stories relating to the Day of the Dead were published in 1947 — "El Día de Muerte" set on the Day of the Dead in Mexico City and "The Next in Line" that was published in his book Dark Carnival about a visit to catacombs in a Mexican village which terrifies the American protagonist. Both stories were likely inspired by his learning about Mexican death rites during his own frightful experience on a 1945 trip to Mexico that included a visit in Guanajuato where he viewed mummies.[8]


### October 2002/2033: The Shore
This vignette characterizes two successive groups of settlers as American emigrants who arrive in "waves" that "spread upon" the Martian "shore" – the first are the frontiersmen described in "The Settlers", and the second are men from the "cabbage tenements and subways" of urban America.


### November 2002/2033: The Fire Balloons
The story first appeared as "…In This Sign" in Imagination, April 1951 after publication of the first (1950) edition of The Martian Chronicles and so, was included in the U.S. edition of The Illustrated Man and in The Silver Locusts. The story was included in the 1997 edition of The Martian Chronicles, though it appeared in earlier special editions – the 1974 edition from The Heritage Press, the September 1979 illustrated trade edition from Bantam Books, the "40th Anniversary Edition" from Doubleday Dell Publishing Group and in the 2001 Book-of-the-Month Club edition.
"The Fire Balloons" is a story about an Episcopal missionary expedition to cleanse Mars of sin, consisting of priests from large American cities led by the Most Reverend Father Joseph Daniel Peregrine and his assistant Father Stone. Peregrine has a passionate interest in discovering the kinds of sins that may be committed by aliens reflected in his book, The Problem of Sin on Other Worlds. Peregrine and Stone argue constantly about whether the mission should focus on cleansing humans or Martians. With the question unanswered, the priests travel to Mars aboard the spaceship Crucifix. The launch of the rocket triggers Peregrine's memories as a young boy of the Fourth of July with his grandfather.
After landing on Mars, Peregrine and Stone meet with the mayor of First City, who advises them to focus their mission on humans. The mayor tells the priests that the Martians look like blue "luminous globes of light" and they saved the life of an injured prospector working in a remote location by transporting him to a highway. The mayor's description of the Martians triggers Peregine's endearing memories of himself launching fire balloons with his grandfather on Independence Day.
Peregrine decides to search for and meet Martians, and he and Stone venture into the hills where the prospector encountered them. The two priests are met by a thousand fire balloons. Stone is terrified and wants to return to First City while Peregrine is overwhelmed by their beauty, imagines his grandfather is there with him to admire them, and wants to converse with them, though the fire balloons disappear. The two priests immediately encounter a rock slide, which Stone believes they escaped by chance and Peregrine believes they were saved by Martians. The two argue their disagreement, and during the night while Stone is sleeping, Peregrine tests his faith in his hunch by throwing himself off a high cliff. As he falls, Peregrine is surrounded by blue light and is set safely on the ground. Peregrine tells Stone of the experience but Stone believes Peregrine was dreaming, so Peregrine takes a gun which he fires at himself and the bullets drop at his feet, convincing his assistant.
Peregrine uses his authority to have the mission build a church in the hills for the Martians. The church is for outdoor services and is constructed after six days of work. A blue glass sphere is brought as a representation of Jesus for the Martians. On the seventh day, a Sunday, Peregrine holds a service in which he plays an organ and uses his thoughts to summon the Martians. The fire balloons, who call themselves the Old Ones, appear as glorious apparitions to the priests and communicate the story of their creation, their immortality, their normally solitary existences, and their pure virtuousness. They thank the priests for building the church and tell them they are unneeded and ask them to relocate to the towns to cleanse the people there. The fire balloons depart, which fills Peregrine with such overwhelming sadness that he wants to be lifted up like his grandfather did when he was a small child. The priests are convinced and withdraw to First Town along with the blue glass sphere that has started to glow from within. Peregrine and Stone believe the sphere is Jesus.
Bradbury said he consulted a Catholic priest in Beverly Hills while he developed the plot for "Fire Balloons". In an interview, Bradbury recalled part of a day-long conversation: "'Listen, Father, how would you act if you landed on Mars and found intelligent creatures in the form of balls of fire? Would you think you ought to save them or would you think they were saved already?' 'Wow! That's a hell of a fine question!' the father exclaimed. And he told me what he would do. In short, what I make Father Peregrine do."[9]
Interpretation of "The Fire Balloons" has been called "ambiguous" because its meaning can be dramatically different due to the context set by the stories that accompany it.[10] Its first appearance in the U.S. in 1951 was as a stand-alone story as "... In This Sign" and in The Illustrated Man that was concurrent with its first appearance in The Silver Locusts in the U.K. which included all of The Martian Chronicles stories with Martian characters. Within The Silver Locusts and the 1997 edition of The Martian Chronicles the strategy used by Martians in "The Fire Balloons" is implicit – they use their telepathic powers to peacefully keep settlers away from their mountains. As in "Ylla" the Martians understand Father Peregrine's fond memories of his grandfather and the Fourth of July celebrations they shared together involving fire balloons before and after the Crucifix lands on Mars. As in "The Earth Men", an elaborate, imaginary world is constructed, though in "The Fire Balloons" it is for the priests to convince them to cleanse humans of sin in First City. The appearance of Martians as fire balloons ends with the chapter.


### February 2003/2034: Interim
First appeared in The Martian Chronicles. Not to be confused with the short horror story or "Time Intervening," which is also under that title.
A vignette describing how the Tenth City is built by colonists.


### April 2003/2034: The Musicians
First appeared in The Martian Chronicles.
Young boys defy their parents and habitually play in and among the otherwise unpopulated ruins of indigenous Martian towns where they perished in their homes. The Firemen methodically incinerate the remnants of Martian civilization and the bones of the Martians. The boys play amongst the relics and make Martian bones into musical instruments.


### May 2003/2034: The Wilderness
First appeared in The Magazine of Fantasy and Science Fiction, November 1952. The story appears in the 1974 edition of The Martian Chronicles by The Heritage Press, the 1979 Bantam Books illustrated trade edition, and the 1997 edition of The Martian Chronicles.
In Independence, Missouri, a woman, Janice Smith, expects a telephone call at midnight from her fiancé Will on Mars. He has already purchased a home on Mars identical to her home on Earth. His response after the long delay due to the distance to Mars is incomplete due to natural interference so, she only hears him say "love". Smith contemplates being a pioneer as the women before her, and then falls asleep for the last time on Earth.


### June 2003/2034: Way in the Middle of the Air
First appeared in the first edition of The Martian Chronicles and not included in the 1997 edition. The work later appeared in the July 1950 issue of Other Worlds Science Stories after five major magazines rejected the manuscript drafted in 1948.[11]
Bradbury explained that the drafting of "Way in the Middle of the Air" was a common way he used writing to address his emotional state affecting him at a moment. He recalled in a 1962 interview that he was so upset about the circumstances of African-Americans in the United States that "I put them in rocket ships and send them off to Mars, in a short story, to rid myself of that tension".[12]
Publication of "Way in the Middle of the Air" in 1950 was groundbreaking for a science fiction story even though the work is considered limited by providing only the viewpoint of white Americans. According to Isiah Lavender III, "Bradbury is one of the very few authors in [science fiction] who dared to consider the effects and consequences of race in America at a time when racism was sanctioned by the culture."[13] Even with the story's limitations, Robert Crossley suggested that it might be considered "the single most incisive episode of black and white relations in science fiction by a white author."[14]
"Way in the Middle of the Air" concerns the coming together of black people in the American South to build a rocket of their own and emigrate to Mars in search of a better life. Samuel Teece, a racist white hardware store owner in a small town, constantly denigrates the departing families and tries to stop one young man, Belter, from leaving because he owes Teece $50. The other travelers quickly take up a collection to settle the debt. Teece's employee Silly tries to leave as well, but Teece reminds Silly of a contract he allegedly signed that requires him to give notice before quitting. Only after one of Teece's friends volunteers to take Silly's place does Teece let the boy go. As Silly hurries after the others, he asks Teece what he will do at night once all the black people have left Earth. Teece realizes that Silly was mocking him about the lynchings in which he has participated; infuriated, he races after Silly but cannot get far due to all the possessions the travelers have left scattered on the road. Teece refuses to watch the rocket liftoff, but takes some comfort in the fact that Silly always addressed him as "Mister."


### 2004–2005/2035–2036: The Naming of Names
First appeared in The Martian Chronicles. (Not to be confused with the short story "The Naming of Names", first published in Thrilling Wonder Stories, August 1949, later published as "Dark They Were, and Golden-Eyed".)
"The Naming of Names" is a short vignette about the names of places on Mars being given American names that memorialize the crews of the four exploratory expeditions, or "mechanical" or "metal" names, which replace the Martian names that were for geographic features and things in nature.
The vignette also describes tourists who visit Mars and shop, and describes the next wave of emigrants as "sophisticates" and people who "instruct" and "rule" and "push" other people about.


### April 2005/2036: Usher II
First published as Carnival of Madness in Thrilling Wonder Stories, April 1950. In 2010, Los Angeles artist Allois, in collaboration with Bradbury, released illustrated copies of "Usher" and "Usher II".[15] The story also appeared in the 2008 Harper Collins/ Voyager edition of The Illustrated Man.
"Usher II" is a horror story and homage to Edgar Allan Poe about the wealthy William Stendahl and the house he built to murder his enemies. The story begins with Stendahl's meeting with Mr. Bigelow, his architect, to perform a final check-out for the completion of his newly built house. Stendahl reads Bigelow architectural specifications taken directly from the description of the House of Usher from the text of Poe's "The Fall of the House of Usher". Stendahl is satisfied and refers to the house as, The House of Usher. The owner is angered that Bigelow does not know anything of or about Poe and sends him away. Bigelow's ignorance is innocent because for decades, anything "produced in any way suggesting ... any creature of the imagination" has been outlawed, including books, many of which were confiscated and burned in the Great Fire thirty-five years earlier, including Stendahl's own fifty thousand book library.
Stendahl is visited by Mr. Garrett, an investigator of Moral Climates, who immediately tells Stendahl that he will have his place dismantled and burned later that day. Stendahl tells Garrett that he spent a huge sum of money for the house and invites the investigator inside for additional information for his investigative report. During the tour, Garrett experiences an automated horror fantasy world, and finds the place "deplorable" as well as a work of genius. Garrett is met by a robot ape that Stendahl demonstrates is a robot and then orders it to kill Garrett. Stendahl has his assistant Pikes, whom he regards as the greatest horror film actor ever when such films were made, construct a robot replica of Garrett to return to Moral Climates to delay any action affecting the house for forty-eight hours. Stendahl and Pikes send invitations out to their enemies for a party later that evening.
About thirty guests arrive at Stendahl's party. Upon greeting them, he tells them to enjoy themselves because the house will soon be destroyed, though Pikes interrupts and shows Stendahl the remnants of Garrett, which are the parts of a robot. They first panic and then Stendahl figures the real Garrett will come to visit since they sent a robot back, and very soon Garrett appears and informs Stendahl that the Dismantlers will arrive in an hour. Stendahl tells Garrett to enjoy the party and offers him some wine that is politely refused. Garrett and Miss Pope then observe Miss Blunt being strangled by an ape and her corpse being stuffed up a chimney. Another laughing Miss Blunt comforts Miss Pope by telling her that what she saw killed was a robot replica of herself. Stendahl serves Garrett wine which he drinks. Garrett watches additional killings performed in a similar manner that he remembers from Poe's "The Premature Burial", "The Pit and the Pendulum", and one other from "The Murders in the Rue Morgue". Stendahl serves Garrett more wine which is consumed and asks the investigator if he would like to see what is planned for him. Garrett agrees and is treated as the character Fortunato from Poe's "The Cask of Amontillado". After Stendahl and Pikes have disposed of all their guests, they leave in a helicopter and, from above, watch the house break apart like the one in Poe's story.


### August 2005/2036: The Old Ones
First appeared in The Martian Chronicles.
"The Old Ones" is a short vignette that describes the last wave of emigrants to Mars – elderly Americans. The title does not refer to the Martians in "The Fire Balloons".


### September 2005/2036: The Martian
First published in Super Science Stories, November 1949.
"The Martian" is the story about an elderly married couple, LaFarge and Anna, who encounter a Martian who wants to live with them as their fourteen-year-old son, Tom, even though Tom died of pneumonia many years before.


### November 2005/2036: The Luggage Store
First appeared in The Martian Chronicles.
"The Luggage Store" is a short dialogue between Father Peregrine and the elderly owner of a luggage store. The proprietor tells Peregrine that he heard on the radio that there will be a war on Earth, looks at Earth in the night sky, and tells the priest he finds the news incredible. Peregrine changes the proprietor's mind by telling him that news of war is unbelievable because Earth is so far away. The shop owner tells the priest of the hundred thousand new emigrants expected in the coming months and Peregrine comments that the travelers will be needed on Earth and that they will probably be turning back. The proprietor tells the priest that he'd better prepare his luggage for a quick sale after which the priest asks if the owner thinks all the emigrants on Mars will return to Earth. The owner believes so because the emigrants have not been on Mars for long, except for himself because he is so old. Peregrine tells the shopkeeper that he is wrong about staying on Mars. The owner is convinced again by the priest, and Peregrine buys a new valise to replace his old one.


### November 2005/2036: The Off Season
First published in Thrilling Wonder Stories, December 1948.
"The Off Season" is the story of former Fourth Expedition crewman Sam Parkhill, who is a character in "—And The Moon Be Still As Bright", and his wife Elma, and their encounters with Martians as they prepare to open the first hot dog stand on Mars, which is decorated with glass Sam broke off old Martian buildings. The Parkhills hope to become wealthy because one hundred thousand new emigrants are expected to arrive to establish Earth Settlement 101 nearby, though Elma points out that the new inhabitants will be Mexican and Chinese nationals. The couple is unaware that Earth is on the brink of global war because their radio is broken.
During the evening, the Parkhills are approached by a Martian they spoke to earlier that day. The Martian learns the Parkhills do not know about the situation on Earth and as the Martian says he wants to show Sam a bronze tube that appears in the Martian's hand. Sam shoots the Martian dead with a gun believing the tube is a weapon. However, Elma discovers the tube contains a document written with Martian hieroglyphics neither of them understand. As Sam tells Elma that the Earth Settlement will protect him from Martians, Elma sees twelve Martian sand ships approaching and Sam believes the Martians want to kill him. Sam takes Elma onto a Martian sand ship he purchased at an auction and learned to operate, and takes off to a town for protection. As Sam's sand ship sails, a young woman appears on the ship's tiller bench. The woman, a vision, tells Sam to return to the hot dog stand. Sam refuses and tells the women to get off his ship. The vision argues that the ship is not his and claims it as part of the Martian world. Sam shoots the vision and it vanishes after breaking into crystals and vaporizing. Elma is disappointed in Sam and asks him to stop the ship, but Sam refuses. In frustration and to display his might, Sam destroys the crystal ruins of a Martian city by shooting them as the sand ship passes by, though Elma is unimpressed and then falls unconscious.
As Sam readies to shoot up another Martian city, three sand ships catch up with him. Sam shoots at them and one ship disintegrates and vaporizes along with its crew. As the two other ships approach Sam's, he gives up by stopping his ship. A Martian calls him, and Sam explains himself and surrenders by throwing down his gun. The Martian tells him to retrieve his gun and return to the hot dog stand where they want to explain something without harming him. Elma wakes up on the journey back.
Back at the hot dog stand, the Martian Leader tells the Parkhills to ready it for operation and to have a celebration. The Leader produces the scrolls which he explains are grants to Sam that sum to half of the entire planet. Sam asks the Leader for an explanation for the gift but the Martians announce their departure and tell him to "prepare" and repeat that the land is his. Sam believes the Martians were telling him the rockets with the new emigrants are arriving, so Sam and Elma start preparing hot dogs. As they prepare food, Sam thinks of the hungry emigrants to feed and botches recitation of Emma Lazarus' poem "The New Colossus" which is on a plaque at the Statue of Liberty in Sam's hometown, New York City. Elma looks at Earth in the night sky and sees an explosion on the planet that gains Sam's attention. Elma tells Sam she believes no customers will be coming to the hot dog stand for a million years.
In "—And the Moon Be Still as Bright", the bodies of dead Martians are corpses. Sam Parkhill's shooting of the Martians dead at his hot dog stand and on his sand ship are illusions projected by one or more Martians somewhere else.


### November 2005/2036: The Watchers
First appeared in The Martian Chronicles. Not to be confused with the 1945 short story of the same name.
"The Watchers" is a short vignette about the concerns of the Martian colonists, who are all Americans, about reports of war on Earth. At nine o'clock in the night sky, they view an explosion that changes the color of Earth, though, three hours later the color returns to normal. At two o'clock in the morning, colonists receive a message that war had begun, that a stockpile of nuclear weapons "prematurely" detonated destroying the Australian continent, and that Los Angeles and London had been bombed. The message said "come home" repeatedly without explanation. The proprietor of a luggage store, who is a character in "The Luggage Store", sells out of stock early in the morning, as colonists prepare to return to Earth.


### December 2005/2036: The Silent Towns
First published in Charm, March 1949.
"The Silent Towns" is a story about thirty year old Walter Gripp, a miner who lived in a remote mountain shack and walked to the town of Marlin Village every two weeks to find a wife. On his December visit Gripp finds the town abandoned and happily helps himself to money, food, clothing, movies, and other luxuries, but soon realizes he is lonely. As he walks to return to his shack, Gripp hears a phone ringing in an abandoned house but he cannot reach it soon enough to communicate with the caller. He hears a telephone ringing in another house and misses the call and realizes he expects the caller to be a woman. In the abandoned home, he obtains a colony telephone directory and starts calling the listed numbers in alphabetical order but stops after contacting a woman's automated message service. Gripps tries his luck with telephone exchanges and government and public institutions, and then places where he thinks a woman would take herself. Gripp calls the biggest beauty parlor in New Texas City and reaches Genevieve Selsor but is cut off. He finds a car and drives a thousand miles to the Deluxe Beauty Salon, fantasizing about Selsor along the way. Gripp cannot find Selsor there and believes she drove to Marlin Village to find him, so he returns and finds Selsor at a beauty parlor holding a box of cream chocolates.
Gripps finds the twenty-seven-year old physically unattractive and suffers while they watch a Clark Gable movie together after which she pours perfume into her hair. They return to the beauty parlor and Selsor declares herself as "last lady on Mars" and Gripp as the last man and presents him with a box containing a wedding dress. Gripp flees, driving across Mars to another tiny town to spend his life happily alone and ignoring any phone he hears ringing.


### April 2026/2057: The Long Years
First published in Maclean's, September 15, 1948.
"The Long Years" is the story of the last days of the life of Hathaway, the physician/geologist crewman from the Fourth Expedition's story "—And the Moon Still Be As Bright". At night during a windstorm, Hathaway visits four graves on a hill away from his family's hut and asks the dead for forgiveness for what he's done because he was lonely. As he returns to the hut, he spots a rocket approaching. He tells the family of the "good news" of a rocket arrival in the morning. He goes to the nearby ruins of New New York City and sets it ablaze as a location for the rocket to land. Hathaway returns to the hut to serve wine to his family in celebration. He reminisces about missing all the rockets evacuating colonists from Mars when the Great War started because he and his whole family were doing archaeological work in the mountains. As his wife and three children drink their wine it all just runs down their chins.
In the morning, the family prepares to greet whoever is in the rocket ship, including a great breakfast. As the rocket lands, Hathaway suffers an angina attack while running toward it. He recovers and continues on. Wilder, who was captain of the Fourth Expedition, emerges, sees Hathaway and greets him. Wilder explains that he has been on a twenty-year mission to the outer solar system; reports that he surveyed Mars before landing and found only one other person, Walter Gripp, who decided to stay on Mars, Wilder ponders with Hathaway the fate of Earth; and agrees to take Hathaway and his family on his return to Earth. Hathaway compliments Wilder on his promotion to lead the twenty-year mission so that Wilder would not slow the development of Mars. Wilder orders his crew out of the spaceship to join Hathaway's family.
On their way to the family hut, Hathaway updates Wilder on the Fourth Expedition's crewmen. Hathway tells Wilder that he visits Jeff Spender's tomb annually to pay his respects, and about Sam Parkhill's hot dog stand which was abandoned a week after opening to return to Earth. Wilder observes Hathaway in physical distress and has his physician crewman check Hathaway. Hathaway tells Wilder that he has stayed alive just to await rescue and now that Wilder has arrived he can die. The doctor gives him a pill and then says what he just spoke was "nonsense". Hathway recovers and continues on to the family hut.
At the hut, Hathaway introduces his family to the crew. Wilder is struck by how young Hathaway's wife appears, given that he met her decades earlier, and he compliments her on her youthfulness. Wilder asks John, Hathaway's son, his age, and John answers twenty-three. Crewman Williamson tells Wilder that John is supposed to be forty-two. Wilder sends Williamson off to investigate on the pretense of checking up on their rocket. Williamson returns to report that he found the graves of Hathaway's wife and children, and that the gravestones said that they died of an unknown disease during July 2007/2038.
As breakfast ends, Hathaway stands and toasts the crew and his family, and as soon he is done he collapses and knows that he will soon be dead. Wilder wants to call the family in to see Hathaway, but Hathaway stops him. Hathaway says they would not understand and he would not want them to understand, and then dies. Wilder converses with Hathaway's wife and concludes that she and the children are all androids, created by Hathaway to keep him company after his wife and children died. The crew buries Hathaway in his family's graveyard.
As Wilder prepares to depart, Williamson asks Wilder about what should be done about the android family and specially asks whether they should be deactivated. Wilder rejects taking them to Earth and says deactivation never crossed his mind. Wilder hands Williamson a gun and tells the crewman that if he can do anything it is better than anything he can do. Williamson goes into the hut and returns to Wilder reporting that he pointed the gun at an android daughter, who responded by smiling, and that he felt shooting them would be "murder". Wilder speculates the androids could operate for up to two more centuries. The rocket departs, and the android family continues on with its endless routines, that includes, for no reason at all, the android wife nightly looking up at Earth in the sky and tending a fire.


### August 2026/2057: There Will Come Soft Rains
First published in Collier's, May 6, 1950, and revised for inclusion in The Martian Chronicles.
An unoccupied, highly automated house of the McClellan family that stands and operates intact in a California city that is otherwise obliterated by a nuclear bomb, and its destruction by a fire caused by a windstorm. The story marks the end of the United States as a nation. The story also commemorates the United States' atomic bombing of Hiroshima on August 5, 1945 (US time) during World War II. The title of the story was taken from Sara Teasdale's anti-war poem "There Will Come Soft Rains" originally published in 1918 during World War I and the 1918 Flu Pandemic.


### October 2026/2057: The Million-Year Picnic
First published in Planet Stories, summer 1946.
William Thomas, his wife Alice, and his three sons have traveled to Mars to escape war under the parents' pretense that the family is taking a fishing trip. Alice is noticeably pregnant with a girl. The family enjoys a warm Martian summer day along water-filled canals. William is troubled by the war on Earth and does his best to keep the children entertained though he mutters his concerns as stray thoughts his children do not completely comprehend. William draws the boys' attention on fish, the ancient Martian cities they pass by, and on finding Martians – the latter, William assures the boys that they will find. While boating in a canal William and his wife listen to a broadcast on their radio and are jolted by what they hear. William remotely detonates the family's rocket, throttles the boat faster to drown out the noise, collides with a wharf and stops. William tells the boys he did it to keep their location secret. William listens in on the atomic radio again and hears nothing for a couple of minutes. He tells the family, "It's over at last". William boats down the canal where they pass six Martian cities and asks the family to choose the best one. They choose the last one and William declares that it will be their new home. He tells the family that they will be joined by Bert Edward's family that includes four girls.
The family settles around a campfire. William burns a variety of documents in it, including government bonds. While doing that, he tells his sons that Earth has been destroyed, and that the way of life on Earth "proved itself wrong" through its own self-destruction. He warns his sons that he will tell them the last point everyday until they really understand it. William takes the family to the canal and tells the children that they will be taught what they need to learn and that they are going to see Martians. William stops at the canal and points to the family's reflection in the water.


## Influences


### Fascination with Mars, the works of Edgar Rice Burroughs, and comics
Bradbury's fascination with Mars started when he was a child, including depictions of Mars in the works of Edgar Rice Burroughs' The Gods of Mars[16] and John Carter, Warrior of Mars.[17] Burroughs' influence on the author was immense, as Bradbury believed "Burroughs is probably the most influential writer in the entire history of the world."[18] Bradbury said that as a child, he memorized all of John Carter and Tarzan and repeated the stories to anyone who would listen.[19] Harold Foster's 1931 series of Tarzan Sunday comics had such an impact on his life that "The Martian Chronicles would never have happened" otherwise.[20]


### Literary influences
Ray Bradbury referred to The Martian Chronicles as "a book of stories pretending to be a novel".[5] He credited a diverse set of literary influences that had an effect on the structure and literary style of The Martian Chronicles, among them Sherwood Anderson, William Shakespeare, Saint-John Perse, and John Steinbeck, as well as Edgar Rice Burroughs, particularly the Barsoom stories and John Carter of Mars books.
Bradbury was particularly inspired by plot and character development in Sherwood Anderson's Winesburg, Ohio that helped him write "vivid and real" stories that improved his earlier writings that were "lifeless robots, mechanical and motionless".[5] The author said the stories took their form as combinations of component "Martian pensées" which were "Shakespearian 'asides,' wandering thoughts, long night visions, predawn half-dreams" honed in a manner inspired by the perfection of Saint-John Perse.[5]
The combination of separate stories to create The Martian Chronicles as "a half-cousin to a novel" was a suggestion of Doubleday editor Walter Bradbury (no relation to the author), who paid Ray Bradbury $750 for the outline of the book. The author only then realized such a book would be comparable to his idea of Winesburg, Ohio.[21] For his approach to integrating previous work into a novel, Bradbury credited Sherwood Anderson's Winesburg, Ohio[5] and John Steinbeck's The Grapes of Wrath[22] as influences on the structure of the work. Winesburg, Ohio is a short story cycle, and The Grapes of Wrath separates narrative chapters with narrative expositions that serve as prologues to subsequent narrative chapters. The idea of using short vignettes, intercalary chapters, and expository narratives to connect the full-length Chronicle stories, their role in the overall work, and the literary style used to write them, Bradbury said were "subconsciously borrowed" from those in The Grapes of Wrath, which he first read at age nineteen, the year the novel was published.[22]


## Reception
Upon publication, The Paris Review noted that "The Martian Chronicles ... was embraced by the science-fiction community as well as critics, a rare achievement for the genre. Christopher Isherwood hailed Bradbury as 'truly original' and a 'very great and unusual talent'."[18] Isherwood argued that Bradbury's works were "tales of the grotesque and arabesque", and compared them to the works of Edgar Allan Poe, writing that Bradbury "already deserves to be measured against the greatest master of his particular genre."[23] Writer and critic Anthony Boucher and critic J. Francis McComas praised Chronicles as "a poet's interpretation of future history beyond the limits of any fictional form".[24] The writer L. Sprague de Camp, however, declared that Bradbury would improve "when he escapes from the influence of Hemingway and Saroyan", placing him in "the tradition of anti-science-fiction writers [who] see no good in the machine age". Still, de Camp acknowledged that Bradbury's "stories have considerable emotional impact, and many will love them".[25]
A decade of after its publication, Damon Knight in his "Books" column for F&SF listed The Martian Chronicles on his top-ten science fiction books of the 1950s.[26]
By September 1979 more than three million copies of The Martian Chronicles had been sold.[27]


## Legacy


### Continued popularity ofThe Martian Chronicles
On November 28, 1964, the NASA spacecraft Mariner 4 flew by Mars and took the first close-up pictures of the Martian surface that were far different than those described by Ray Bradbury. In spite of direct visual and scientific information since then that indicates that Mars is nothing like Bradbury's descriptions in The Martian Chronicles, the novel remains a popular work of "classic short stories", "science fiction", and "classic fiction anthologies and collections" as indicated by the Amazon book store best seller lists.[28] In an introduction to a 2015 edition of the work, Canadian astronaut and former International Space Station commander Chris Hadfield speculated on the continuing popularity of the work, attributing it to beautiful descriptions of the Martian landscape, its ability to "challenge and inspire" the reader to reflect on humanity's history of related follies and failures, and the popular idea that someday some people will come to accept Mars as being their permanent home.[29] Bradbury attributed the attraction of readers to his book because the story is a myth or fable rather than science fiction. He said "... even the most deeply rooted physicists at Cal-Tech accept breathing the fraudulent oxygen atmosphere I have loosed on Mars. Science and machines can kill each other off or be replaced. Myth, seen in mirrors, incapable of being touched, stays on. If it is not immortal, it almost seems such."[5]


### Bradbury Landing on Mars
The August 6, 2012, Martian landing site of Curiosity, NASA's Mars Rover, was named Bradbury Landing in honor of Ray Bradbury on August 22, 2012, on what would have been the author's 92nd birthday. On naming it, Michael Meyer, NASA program scientist for Curiosity, said: "This was not a difficult choice for the science team. Many of us and millions of other readers were inspired in our lives by stories Ray Bradbury wrote to dream of the possibility of life on Mars."[30]


## Adaptations


### Theater
A stage production of "Way in the Middle of the Air" was produced at the Desilu Studios Gower Studios, Hollywood, California in 1962.[31]
The debut of a theater adaptation of The Martian Chronicles was at the Cricket Theater (The Ritz) in Northeast Minneapolis in 1976.[32]


### Film
In 1960, Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer bought the film rights but no film was made.[33]
In 1988, the Soviet Armenian studio Armenfilm produced the feature film The 13th Apostle, starring Juozas Budraitis, Donatas Banionis, Armen Dzhigarkhanyan, based on The Martian Chronicles. The film was directed by Armenian actor and screenwriter, Suren Babayan.[34]
The Uzbek filmmaker Nozim To'laho'jayev made two films based on sections from the book: 1984's animated short There Will Come Soft Rains (Russian: Будет ласковый дождь)[35] and 1987's full-length live action film Veld (Russian: Вельд), with one of the subplots based on The Martian.[36]
In 2011 Paramount Pictures acquired the film rights with the intention of producing a film franchise, with John Davis producing through Davis Entertainment.[37]


### Music
The Martian Chronicles was adapted as a full-length contemporary opera by composer Daniel Levy and librettist Elizabeth Margid.[38] This is the only musical adaptation authorized by Bradbury himself, who turned down Lerner and Loewe in the 1960s when they asked his permission to make a musical based on the novel.[39] The work received its initial readings from the Harriet Lake Festival of New Plays at the Orlando Shakespeare Theater in 2006,[40] and was presented in workshop form in the inaugural season of the Fordham University Lincoln Center Alumni Company in 2008.[41] The "Night Meeting" episode was presented at Cornelia Street Cafe's "Entertaining Science" series on June 9, 2013.[42] The entire work was presented as a staged reading with a cast of Broadway actors at Ars Nova NYC on February 11, 2015.[43] Three scenes were presented as a workshop production with immersive staging, directed by Carlos Armesto of Theatre C and conducted by Benjamin Smoulder at Miami University, Oxford OH on September 17–19, 2015.[44]
In 2001 a Danish melodic metal band Royal Hunt released a concept album called "The Mission," based on "The Martian Chronicles."
Hungarian Progressive rock band Solaris named their first studio album “Marsbéli Krónikák” in honour of The Martian Chronicles


### Radio
The Martian Chronicles was adapted for radio in the science fiction radio series Dimension X. This truncated version contained elements of the stories "Rocket Summer", "Ylla", "–and the Moon Be Still as Bright", "The Settlers", "The Locusts", "The Shore", "The Off Season", "There Will Come Soft Rains", and "The Million-Year Picnic".
"—and the Moon Be Still as Bright" and "There Will Come Soft Rains" were also adapted for separate episodes in the same series. The short stories "Mars Is Heaven" and "Dwellers in Silence" also appeared as episodes of Dimension X. The latter is in a very different form from the one found in The Martian Chronicles.
A very abridged spoken word reading of "There Will Come Soft Rains" and "Usher II" was made in 1975 with Leonard Nimoy as narrator.
A BBC Radio 4 adaption, produced by Andrew Mark Sewell as an hour-long programme and starring Derek Jacobi as Captain Wilder, was broadcast on June 21, 2014, as part of the Dangerous Visions series.[45][46]


### Television miniseries
In 1979 NBC partnered with the BBC to commission The Martian Chronicles, a three-episode miniseries adaptation running just over four hours. It was written by Richard Matheson and was directed by Michael Anderson. Rock Hudson starred as Wilder, Darren McGavin as Parkhill, Bernadette Peters as Genevieve Selsor, Bernie Casey as Jeff Spender, Roddy McDowall as Father Stone, and Barry Morse as Hathaway, as well as Fritz Weaver. Bradbury found the miniseries "just boring".[47]


### Television adaptations of individual stories
The cable television series The Ray Bradbury Theater adapted some individual short stories from The Martian Chronicles including "Mars is Heaven", "The Earthmen", "And the Moon Be Still as Bright", "Usher II", "The Martian", "Silent Towns", and "The Long Years".[48] Video releases of the series included a VHS tape entitled Ray Bradbury's Chronicles: The Martian Episodes with some editions with three episodes and others with five.[49][50][51]


### Comic books
Several of the short stories in The Martian Chronicles were adapted into graphic novel-style stories in the EC Comics magazines, including "There Will Come Soft Rains" in Weird Fantasy #17, "The Long Years" in Weird Science #17, "Mars Is Heaven" in Weird Science #18, "The Million-Year Picnic" in Weird Fantasy #21 and "The Silent Towns" in Weird Fantasy #22.
In 2011, Hill & Wang published Ray Bradbury's The Martian Chronicles: The Authorized Adaptation as a graphic novel, with art by Dennis Calero.[52]


### Video games
The Martian Chronicles adventure game was published in 1996.


## The Other Martian Tales
The Martian Chronicles: The Complete Edition published in 2009 by Subterranean Press and PS Publishing contains the 1997 edition of The Martian Chronicles with an additional collection of stories under the title The Other Martian Tales, which includes the following:
"The Lonely Ones" (Startling Stories, July 1949, reprinted in Bradbury Stories: 100 of His Most Celebrated Tales)
"The Exiles" (The Magazine of Fantasy and Science Fiction, Winter/Spring 1950, reprinted in The Illustrated Man)
"The One Who Waits" (The Arkham Sampler, summer 1949, reprinted in The Machineries of Joy)
"The Disease" (previously unpublished)
"Dead of Summer" (previously unpublished)
"The Martian Ghosts" (previously unpublished)
"Jemima True" (previously unpublished)
"They All Had Grandfathers" (previously unpublished)
"The Strawberry Window" (Star Science Fiction Stories #3, ed. Frederik Pohl, Ballantine, 1954, reprinted in A Medicine for Melancholy)
"Way in the Middle of the Air"
"The Other Foot" (New Story, March 1951, reprinted in The Illustrated Man)
"The Wheel" (previously unpublished)
"The Love Affair" (The Love Affair, Lord John Press 1982, reprinted in The Toynbee Convector)
"The Marriage" (previously unpublished)
"The Visitor" (Startling Stories, November 1948, reprinted in The Illustrated Man)
"The Lost City of Mars" (Playboy, January 1967, reprinted in I Sing the Body Electric)
"Holiday" (The Arkham Sampler, Autumn 1949)
"Payment in Full" (Thrilling Wonder Stories, February 1950)
"The Messiah" (Welcome Aboard, spring 1971, reprinted in Long After Midnight)
"Night Call, Collect" (Super Science Stories, April 1949 as "I, Mars", reprinted in I Sing the Body Electric)
"The Blue Bottle" (Planet Stories, Fall 1950, reprinted in Long After Midnight)
"Dark They Were, and Golden-Eyed" (Thrilling Wonder Stories, August 1949, reprinted in A Medicine for Melancholy)
The Other Martian Stories also includes the 1964 and 1997 The Martian Chronicles screenplays, and essays by John Scalzi, Marc Scott Zicree, and Richard Matheson.


## See also
1950 in science fiction
Le Monde's 100 Books of the Century


## References
^ "Books Published Today". The New York Times. May 4, 1950. p. 40.
^ a b "The 2007 Pulitzer Prize Winner in Special Citations: Ray Bradbury". Pulitzer Prize Board. Retrieved October 9, 2020.
^ Paul Brians (March 27, 2003). "Ray Bradbury's The Martian Chronicles (1950)". Retrieved October 17, 2020.
^ Bradbury, Ray (November 15, 2000). Ray Bradbury Accepts the 2000 Medal for Distinguished Contribution to American Letters (Speech). 2000 National Book Awards. Retrieved October 12, 2020.
^ a b c d e f Bradbury, Ray (1997). "Green Town, Somewhere on Mars; Mars, Somewhere in Egypt". The Martian Chronicles (Epub ed.). HarperCollins Publishers Inc. (published 2013). ISBN 9780062242266.
^ "The Martian Chronicles [also known as The Silver Locusts (UK)]". Bradbury Media. Archived from the original on December 11, 2008. Retrieved June 20, 2018.
^ "The Martian Chronicles: The Complete Edition". ISFDB.org. The Internet Speculative Fiction Database. Retrieved November 14, 2020.
^ Bradbury, Ray (1994) [1980]. "Drunk, and in Charge of a Bicycle". Zen in the Art of Writing. Joshua Odell Editions. p. 61. ISBN 1-877741-09-4.
^ Bradbury, Ray (1966). "Chapter 3". 'If the Sun Dies' (Interview). Interviewed by Oriana Fallachi. Antheneum. p. 25. Retrieved November 25, 2020.
^ Seed, David (2015). Ray Bradbury. University of Illinois Press. p. 52.
^ Davin, Erik (2006). Partners in Wonder: Women and the Birth of Science Fiction, 1926–1965. Lexington Books. p. 209.
^ Bradbury, Ray. "Sum and Substance: With Ray Bradbury and Herman Harvey". Conversations with Ray Bradbury (by Steven Louis Aggelis) (Interview). Interviewed by Herman Harvey. Florida State University Libraries. p. 11.
^ Lavender, Isaiah (2011). Race in American Science Fiction. Indiana University Press. p. 98.
^ Crossley, Robert (2004). "Critical Essay". Kindred. By Octavia Butler. Boston: Beacon. pp. 265–280. ISBN 978-0-807-08369-7.
^ Allois (December 26, 2011). "Fall of the House of Usher and Usher II". Allois Studios.
^ Dilawar, Arvind (October 17, 2017). "5 Books Ray Bradbury Thought You Should Read". Retrieved October 28, 2020.
^ Bradbury, Ray (April 2012). "Ray Bradbury: The day I read to a legend" (Interview). Interviewed by Matt Novak. Los Angeles, California: BBC. Retrieved October 28, 2020.
^ a b Weller, Sam (Spring 2010). "Ray Bradbury, The Art of Fiction No. 203". The Paris Review (192). Retrieved October 12, 2020.
^ Bradbury, Ray (May 28, 2012). "Take Me Home". The New Yorker (published June 4, 2012). Retrieved October 28, 2020.
^ Bradbury, Ray (June 4, 2012). "Take Me Home". The New Yorker. Retrieved June 9, 2012.
^ Bradbury, Ray (1990). "The Long Road to Mars". The Martian Chronicles (Fortieth Anniversary ed.). Doubleday.
^ a b Bradbury, Ray (2010). "Writing and Creativity". Listen to the Echoes: The Ray Bradbury Interviews (Interview). Interviewed by Sam Weller. Melville House. ISBN 978-1-61219-230-7.
^ Enns, Anthony (June 1, 2015). "The Poet of the Pulps: Ray Bradbury and the Struggle for Prestige". Belphégor (13–1). doi:10.4000/belphegor.615. Retrieved October 19, 2020.
^ "Recommended Reading", F&SF, April 1951, p. 112
^ "Book Reviews", Astounding Science Fiction, February 1951, p. 151
^ "Books", F&SF, April 1960, p. 99
^ Banker, Stephen (September 23, 1979). "Interview with Ray Bradbury". Washington Post. Retrieved November 3, 2020.
^ " The Martian Chronicles reprint edition, Kindle edition Best Sellers Rank". Amazon.com. November 14, 2020. Retrieved November 14, 2020.
^ Hadfield, Chris (July 10, 2015). "Chris Hadfield pens an ode to the 'delightful impossibility' of Ray Bradbury's Martian Chronicles (reprint of Folio Society's 2015 edition of The Martian Chronicles)". The Globe and Mail. Retrieved November 14, 2020.
^ "Mars Science Laboratory Mission News: NASA Mars Rover Begins Driving at Bradbury Landing" (Press release). Pasadena, California: Jet Propulsion Laboratory. NASA. August 22, 2012. Retrieved November 14, 2020.
^ Bradbury, Ray (2004). Conversations with Ray Bradbury. Univ. Press of Mississippi. p. xxxi. ISBN 978-1-57806-641-4.
^ Bradbury, Ray (2004). Conversations with Ray Bradbury. Univ. Press of Mississippi. p. xxxiii. ISBN 978-1-57806-641-4.
^ Scheuer, Philip K. (February 15, 1960). "Conquest of Mars Told by Bradbury: MGM Will Picturize Novel; Walters Explains 'Jumbo' Yen". Los Angeles Times. p. C9.
^ The Thirteenth Apostle at IMDb
^ Budet laskovyy dozhd (There Will Come Soft Rains) at IMDb
^ Veld at IMDb
^ Kit, Borys (April 12, 2011). "Ray Bradbury's 'The Martian Chronicles' to Be Made Into Film By Paramount (Exclusive)". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved March 3, 2019.
^ "UNKNOWN". Martian Chronicles Opera. Archived from the original on December 23, 2012.
^ Eller, Jonathan R. (2011). Becoming Ray Bradbury. Urbana, Chicago, and Springfield: University of Illinois Press. p. 243. ISBN 978-0-252-03629-3.
^ "Past Season Archives at Orlando Shakespeare Theater". orlandoshakes.org.
^ Rachel Buttner. "Alumni Theatre Company Returns to the Stage". Fordham University. Retrieved June 20, 2018. The company's first show, a musical adaptation of the Ray Bradbury's 1950s science fiction novel The Martian Chronicles, …
^ "Performances June 09 – June 16, 2013". The Cornelia Street Café. Archived from the original on September 7, 2015. Retrieved July 14, 2017.
^ "Martian Chronicles". Theatre C.
^ ""The Martian Chronicles" comes to life on stage". Oxford, Ohio: Miami University. September 15, 2015.
^ "Dangerous Visions: The Martian Chronicles". BBC. Retrieved June 21, 2014.
^ "The Martian Chronicles". BBC. June 21, 2014. Retrieved June 21, 2014.
^ Weller, Sam (2005). The Bradbury Chronicles: The Life of Ray Bradbury. New York: HarperCollins. pp. 301–302. ISBN 0-06-054581-X.
^ "The Ray Bradbury Theater Episode Guide - Inner Mind". www.innermind.com.
^ "Synopsis at Fandango.com".
^ "Amazon.com".
^ "Ray Bradbury Chronicles: The Martian Episodes Videos - Zimbio". www.zimbio.com.
^ Ray Bradbury (2011). Ray Bradbury's The Martian Chronicles: The Authorized Adaptation. Illustrated by Dennis Calero. Farrar, Straus and Giroux. ISBN 978-0-8090-8045-8.


## External links
The Martian Chronicles title listing at the Internet Speculative Fiction Database
v
t
e
The Martian Chronicles (1950)
Fahrenheit 451 (1953)
Dandelion Wine (1957)
Something Wicked This Way Comes (1962)
The Halloween Tree (1972)
Death Is a Lonely Business (1985)
A Graveyard for Lunatics (1990)
Green Shadows, White Whale (1992)
From the Dust Returned (2001)
Let's All Kill Constance (2002)
Farewell Summer (2006)
"Hollerbochen's Dilemma" (1938)
"The Scythe" (1943)
"I, Rocket" (1944)
"The Lake" (1944)
"Frost and Fire" (1946)
"The Million Year Picnic" (1946)
"The Small Assassin" (1946)
"I See You Never" (1947)
"Fever Dream" (1948)
"The Fruit at the Bottom of the Bowl" (1948)
"The Long Years" (1948)
"Mars Is Heaven!" (1948)
"Dark They Were, and Golden-Eyed" (1949)
"The Exiles" (1949)
"Marionettes, Inc." (1949)
"The Long Rain" (1950)
"The Rocket" (1950)
"There Will Come Soft Rains" (1950)
"The Veldt" (1950)
"Ylla" (1950)
"Embroidery" (1951)
"The Fog Horn" (1951)
"Here There Be Tygers" (1951)
"The Pedestrian" (1951)
"The April Witch" (1952)
"A Sound of Thunder" (1952)
"The Wilderness" (1952)
"The Flying Machine" (1953)
"The Golden Kite, the Silver Wind" (1953)
"The Meadow" (1953)
"The Murderer" (1953)
"Sun and Shadow" (1953)
"All Summer in a Day" (1954)
"The Dragon" (1955)
"The Aqueduct" (1979)
"Banshee" (1984)
"The Toynbee Convector" (1984)
"Is That You, Herb?" (2003)
Dark Carnival (1947)
The Illustrated Man (1951)
The Golden Apples of the Sun (1953)
The October Country (1955)
A Medicine for Melancholy (1959)
The Day It Rained Forever (1959)
The Small Assassin (1962)
R Is for Rocket (1962)
The Machineries of Joy (1964)
The Vintage Bradbury (1965)
S Is for Space (1966)
Twice 22 (1966)
I Sing the Body Electric! (1969)
Ray Bradbury (1975)
Long After Midnight (1976)
The Fog Horn & Other Stories (1979)
The Last Circus and the Electrocution (1980)
The Stories of Ray Bradbury (1980)
The Fog Horn and Other Stories (1980)
Dinosaur Tales (1983)
A Memory of Murder (1984)
The Toynbee Convector (1988)
Classic Stories 1 (1990)
Classic Stories 2 (1990)
The Parrot Who Met Papa (1991)
Selected from Dark They Were, and Golden-Eyed (1991)
Quicker Than the Eye (1996)
Driving Blind (1997)
Ray Bradbury Collected Short Stories (2001)
One More for the Road (2002)
Bradbury Stories: 100 of His Most Celebrated Tales (2003)
The Cat's Pajamas: Stories (2004)
A Sound of Thunder and Other Stories (2005)
The Dragon Who Ate His Tail (2007)
Summer Morning, Summer Night (2007)
A Pleasure to Burn (2010)
The Collected Stories of Ray Bradbury (2011, 2014)
The Meadow (1947)
The Flying Machine: A One-Act Play for Three Men (1953)
The Wonderful Ice Cream Suit and Other Plays (1972)
Pillar of Fire and Other Plays (1975)
The Martian Chronicles (1986)
The Wonderful Ice Cream Suit (1986)
Fahrenheit 451 (1986)
Dandelion Wine (1988)
The Veldt (1988)
It Came from Outer Space (1953)
The Beast from 20,000 Fathoms (1953)
Moby Dick (1956 screenplay)
"I Sing the Body Electric" (1962)
The Autumn People (1965)
Tomorrow Midnight (1966)
Fahrenheit 451 (1966)
The Picasso Summer (1969)
The Illustrated Man (1969)
The Martian Chronicles (1980 miniseries)
The Electric Grandmother (1982)
Something Wicked This Way Comes (1983)
Bradbury 13 (radio series, 1983–84)
Fahrenheit 451 (1984)
"The Burning Man" (1985)
The Veldt (1987)
The Ray Bradbury Theater (TV series, 1985–86, 1988-1992)
The Halloween Tree (1993)
Dandelion Wine (1997)
The Wonderful Ice Cream Suit (1998)
A Sound of Thunder (2005)
Ray Bradbury's Chrysalis (2008)
The Whispers (2015)
Fahrenheit 451 (2018)
Futuria Fantasia (1939–1940)
The Mummies of Guanajuato (1978)
Zen in the Art of Writing (1990)
It Came from Outer Space (2003 book)
Guy Montag
Bettina F. Bradbury (daughter)
Spaceship Earth
Ray Bradbury Center
Bradbury Landing
Ray Bradbury Award
Fuck Me, Ray Bradbury
Dandelion crater
"Treehouse of Horror Presents: Simpsons Wicked This Way Comes"
VIAF
Germany
United States
France
BnF data
Australia
Israel
MusicBrainz work
MusicBrainz release group


URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Puppet_Masters
Content:

The Puppet Masters is a 1951 science fiction novel by American writer Robert A. Heinlein, in which American secret agents battle parasitic invaders from outer space. It was originally serialized in Galaxy Science Fiction (September, October, and November 1951).
The novel evokes a sense of paranoia and Heinlein repeatedly makes explicit the analogy between the mind-controlling parasites and the Communist Russians, echoing the prevailing Second Red Scare in the United States. The book takes up the then common theme of sightings of flying saucers, the plot assuming that the "saucers" seen in the 1950s were part of a preliminary reconnaissance of Earth, carried out by the extraterrestrials in preparation for a full-fledged invasion sixty years later.


## Background
The novel starts in 2007. Following a nuclear war between the Soviet Union and the Western Bloc, which left both sides battered but unbroken, both sides return to a state of Cold War. Washington, D.C., and other US cities devastated in nuclear strikes had been completely rebuilt. The Soviet Union and China remain a single bloc dominated by Moscow, and the sharp Sino-Soviet split of the late 1950s never happened.
Social customs have changed somewhat, in a way typical for Heinlein's fiction (i.e. having become more liberal, such as marriage contracts being possible with fixed terms, etc.) and ray guns and personal flying cars are commonplace. "Slug throwing guns" remain in possession of some private citizens, but are considered obsolete by professionals. Space stations exist and colonies have been established on the planet Venus (depicted, as common in science fiction of the time, as a tropical planet habitable by humans). There exists a wakefulness-promoting drug known as "tempus fugit" that most agents carry a tube of. Although they are considered not habit forming they do produce a mild euphoria, but mostly used as they can stretch out the users subjective perception of time, 'by a factor of ten or more'.[1]
Space technology is far more advanced than in the actual first decade of the 21st century. For example, in the last scene, a space warship is sent on a twelve-year trip to Titan, with not only life-support for a large crew, but also enough armaments to confront an entire world on its own.
However, communications satellites have not been thought of, and television broadcasts are still limited to line-of-sight, as they were at the time of writing. This is of critical importance to the plot. The territory of the United States is divided into numerous transmission blocks, which receive television broadcasts from their neighbors and relay them onwards. When the invaders seize one of these blocks, they effectively control all communications within it and can isolate its inhabitants from the outside world, deny the central government any access to them, and consolidate control at their leisure.
The current president—on his second term—had established directly upon being first elected a new intelligence agency, known as the Section. Its creation was never authorized by Congress and its existence is kept secret, being funded by sums diverted from innocuous sounding items in the budget. It has a disguised underground headquarters in Washington, D.C., and a network of similarly disguised branch offices around the US. Unlike the clearly demarked spheres of the FBI and CIA, the Section carries out extensive espionage in Soviet territory, but also conducts operations inside the United States. If ordered to, its agents are ready to shoot and kill American citizens on US soil. The Section's Director, who had been the president's campaign manager, is universally called "The Old Man". Only gradually does the reader learn that he is the protagonist's actual father.


## Plot
In the summer of 2007, Earth is under attack. Slug-like creatures, arriving in flying saucers, are attaching themselves to people's backs, taking control of their victims' nervous systems, and manipulating those people as puppets. The Old Man, the head of a clandestine national security agency called the Section, goes to Des Moines, Iowa, with Sam and Mary, two of his best agents, to investigate a flying saucer report, but much more seriously the ominous disappearance of the six agents sent previously. They discover that "the slugs" are steadily taking over Des Moines, but they cannot convince the US president to declare an emergency.
Sam takes two other agents and returns to Des Moines to get more evidence of the invasion. They fail and are forced to flee quickly, but in the confusion, a slug gains control of one of the agents. Back in Washington the team discovers the slug and captures it, but later it escapes and attaches itself to Sam, using Sam's skills and knowledge to make a clean escape.
While under control, Sam uses the Constitution Club—whose membership includes many important members of the city's political elite—to gain more hosts for the slugs. The Old Man captures him, takes him to Section's new headquarters, and later coerces Sam into allowing himself to be possessed by the slug again. Under drug-induced hypnosis, Sam reveals that the slugs come from Titan, the sixth moon of Saturn. Later the Section exposes several possessed congressmen at a session of Congress, finally persuading the Congress that the United States is under attack. The law is passed requiring people to have bare backs to demonstrate that they are not carrying slugs.
The Army prepares a counterattack in the most heavily infested areas, planning to take over most broadcast centers and reveal the truth to the local residents. Sam drives alone to Kansas City and discovers that the slugs now possess almost all residents. He returns to Washington too late to stop the operation, which fails; the invading soldiers are either killed or captured by the slugs.
Sam and Mary take a short leave, get married and have a happy honeymoon that is interrupted by a slug that seems to have been targeting Sam for repossession. They return to work and discover that people are now required to be practically naked as the slugs learned to attach themselves to other body parts. Together with the Old Man, they go to Pass Christian, Mississippi, to inspect a flying saucer that had made a bad landing. Inside the alien ship, Mary is overwhelmed by repressed memories from the time she was a child on Venus and had been possessed by a slug. The slug had died from "nine-day fever", a deadly disease native to Venus.
Learning that the disease kills slugs faster than their human hosts, the authorities adopt biological warfare and release infected apes into enemy-held territory. Slugs possess the apes and then quickly transmit the disease to each other. Several carefully timed days later, thousands of volunteers are parachuted to administer the cure to those people whose slugs have died. Sam and the Old Man join the effort in Jefferson City, Missouri.
The Old Man gets possessed by the last healthy slug in the city, captures Sam and escapes in an air-car heading to the Yucatán, where the slug intends to restart its effort to conquer humanity. Sam manages to kill the slug and crash the air-car.
Some years later, Sam and Mary board a spaceship headed for Saturn to take the offensive. Sam expresses the hope that a way would be found to save the small elf-like hosts whom the slugs enslaved.


## Characters
Sam, born Elihu Nivens, is the classic Heinlein hero, multi-talented, independent, fiercely loyal to friends and an implacable enemy to foes. He is thirtyish, but has changed appearance so many times even he has doubts as to how he originally looked.
Mary, born Allucquere in a religious commune in Antarctica before growing up on Venus, is Heinlein's classic heroine. She is beautiful, red-headed, hard-nosed and brilliant. Sam describes her as having the "real redheaded saurian bony structure to her skull". Her professional exterior conceals psychological scars from her encounter with the slugs as a child. Only the Old Man knows the truth about her, thanks to the deep hypnotic analysis that all agents have to undergo.
The Old Man, born Andrew Nivens, is the head of a top secret government agency that he wishes did not have to exist, doing his job reluctantly because nobody else would do it properly. He represents the third of Heinlein's favorite types of character, the "wise, grumpy old man". He is the first in the line that includes Jubal Harshaw, Professor Bernardo de la Paz, Johann Sebastian Bach Smith, "Kettle Belly" Baldwin, and the later life of Lazarus Long.


## Alternative version
Heinlein's original version of the novel was 96,000 words, and was cut to 72,000 words for both the 1951 book version and the serialization in Galaxy Science Fiction. For the Galaxy version, editor H. L. Gold also did extensive rewriting, to which Heinlein strenuously objected.[2]
In 1990, two years after Heinlein's death, an expanded version was published with the consent of his widow, Virginia Heinlein. This edition contained material that had been cut from the original published version, because the book was deemed to be too long and controversial for the market in 1951. The uncut version seemed more risqué in 1951 than it did decades later. For example, in the uncut version the book begins with Sam waking up in bed with a blonde whom he had casually picked up the evening before, without even bothering to learn her name; the older version omitted all mention of her. The 1951 version does mention that men possessed by the invaders lost all sexual feeling—an essential element in the early parts of the plot; the original publisher completely cut out a reference to the "puppet masters" later discovering human sexuality and embarking upon wild orgies, broadcast live on television in the areas under their control. Also all references to the Soviet Union were eliminated.


## Reception
Boucher and McComas characterized The Puppet Masters as "a thunderously exciting melodrama of intrigue", noting that Heinlein displayed "not only his usual virtues of clear logic, rigorous detail-work, and mastery of indirect exposition", but also unexpected virtues like "a startling facility in suspense devices [and] a powerful ingenuity in plotting".[3] P. Schuyler Miller, noting that the novel's "climactic situations seem to be telegraphed", suggested that Heinlein presented his background situations so effectively that readers solve the story's mysteries more quickly than Heinlein allowed his characters to.[4] In his "Books" column for The Magazine of Fantasy & Science Fiction, Damon Knight selected the novel as one of the 10 best SF books of the 1950s.[5]
The book was also reviewed in the 15 June 1951 issue of Kirkus Reviews. The reviewer wrote
The recurrent enigma of the flying saucer is finally solved when an aerial pieplate is caught with its exhaust down by the F.B.I. of 2007. Hero Sam penetrates the contaminated area, brings a 'master' back—a gelatinous gray mass which attaches itself to a soldier's body and controls his thought processes. Sam and his girl spot further landings, plan a counter campaign and eventually are able to rid the solar system of its parasites. Exciting, even if it exacts a strong stomach.[6]


## Adaptations
The Brain Eaters, a 1958 science fiction film directed by Bruno VeSota, bore a number of similarities to Heinlein's novel. Heinlein sued the film's producers, including executive producer Roger Corman, for plagiarism, asking $150,000 in damages. The case was settled out of court for $5,000,[7] which included Heinlein's stipulation that his name not be used on screen or in any way with the production. The case halted actor John Payne's intention of producing a film based on Heinlein's novel.
The theme of the novel is echoed in "The Invisibles", an episode of The Outer Limits aired in 1964, and also in "Operation -- Annihilate!", the last episode of the first season of Star Trek in 1967. Similarly, in the story line begun in the Star Trek: The Next Generation episode "Coming of Age" and completed in "Conspiracy", aliens from a faraway sector invade the bodies of high-ranking Starfleet admirals in an attempt to compromise the command structure and spearhead an invasion of Earth.
The novel was adapted, with some plot and character changes, into the 1994 film of the same name.[8]


## Influence
The Body Snatchers by Jack Finney (1954) takes up a similar premise of extraterrestrials taking over the bodies of humans. Also in the plot of the 1956 What Mad Universe by Fredric Brown—as in that of Puppet Masters—police and vigilantes ruthlessly shoot down anyone suspected of being controlled by the book's invaders from space.
Kenneth Von Gunden's novel Star Spawn[9] takes up the basic premise of The Puppet Masters and transfers it to a medieval setting. Extraterrestrial parasites able to take over the bodies of humans and control them invade Medieval England and embark on conquering it, castle by castle—and are eventually foiled by the highly resourceful Friar Gregory and his friend Sir Morrough the Knight.
N. K. Jemisin's short story "Walking Awake," included in her short story collection How Long 'til Black Future Month?,[10] is a response to Heinlein's novel. The story follows Sadie, a caregiver who is complicit in a system that raises human hosts for alien parasitic beings (beings we later learn are not aliens, but were created by humanity in the distant past).[11]


## Citations
^ The Puppet Masters, 1951, p. 35
^ Giuseppe Lippi (introduction) (1990). Il terrore dalla sesta luna. Mondadori. ISBN 8804341033.
^ "Recommended Reading," The Magazine of Fantasy & Science Fiction, February 1952, p. 105
^ "The Reference Library", Astounding Science Fiction, March 1952, pp. 159
^ "Books", The Magazine of Fantasy & Science Fiction, April 1960, p. 99
^ "The Puppet Masters". Kirkus Reviews. Retrieved October 5, 2022.
^ Senn, Bryan (2015). A Year of Fear: A Day-By-Day Guide to 366 Horror Films. Jefferson, N.C.: McFarland & Company. ISBN 9781476610900. OCLC 905696326.
^ Campbell, Bob (October 22, 1994). "'Puppet Masters' an erratic but entertaining film". Honolulu Star-Bulletin. p. 9.
^ Kenneth Von Gunden, Star Spawn, Ace Books, New York, 1990, ISBN 0-441-46992-2
^ N. K. Jemisin, "How Long 'til Black Future Month", Orbit Books, 2018, ISBN 978-0316491341
^ Tasha Fierce, "Together, we are the future: Going from here in N.K. Jemisin’s Walking Awake", "Medium", https://medium.com/@TashaFierce/together-we-are-the-future-going-from-here-in-n-k-jemisins-walking-awake-8257ab8eda9a


## General and cited sources
Clute, John, and David Pringle. "Heinlein, Robert A." The Encyclopedia of Science Fiction. Eds. John Clute, David Langford, Peter Nicholls and Graham Sleight. Gollancz, 22 Oct. 2014. Accessed 27 Oct. 2014.
Holdstock, Robert, ed., Encyclopedia of Science Fiction, London: Cathay Books, p. 109, ISBN 0-86178-186-4, 1978.
Tuck, Donald H. (1974). The Encyclopedia of Science Fiction and Fantasy. Chicago: Advent. p. 215. ISBN 0-911682-20-1.
Warren, Bill. Keep Watching the Skies: American Science Fiction Films of the Fifties, 21st Century Edition. Jefferson, North Carolina: McFarland & Company, 2009. ISBN 0-89950-032-3.


## External links
The Puppet Masters title listing at the Internet Speculative Fiction Database
The Puppet Masters at Open Library
The Puppet Masters as serialized in Galaxy parts 1, 2, and 3 at the Internet Archive
v
t
e
Bibliography
The Man Who Sold the Moon (1950)
The Green Hills of Earth (1951)
Revolt in 2100 (1953)
Methuselah's Children (1958)
Orphans of the Sky (1963)
The Past Through Tomorrow (1967)
Time Enough for Love (1973)
The Notebooks of Lazarus Long (1978)
The Number of the Beast (1980)
The Cat Who Walks Through Walls (1985)
To Sail Beyond the Sunset (1987)
The Pursuit of the Pankera (2020)
Rocket Ship Galileo (1947)
Space Cadet (1948)
Red Planet (1949)
Farmer in the Sky (1950)
Between Planets (1951)
The Rolling Stones (1952)
Starman Jones (1953)
The Star Beast (1954)
Tunnel in the Sky (1955)
Time for the Stars (1956)
Citizen of the Galaxy (1957)
Have Space Suit—Will Travel (1958)
For Us, the Living: A Comedy of Customs (1939/2003)
Beyond This Horizon (1948)
Sixth Column (1949)
The Puppet Masters (1951)
Variable Star (1955/2006)
Double Star (1956)
The Door into Summer (1957)
Starship Troopers (1959)
Stranger in a Strange Land (1961)
Podkayne of Mars (1963)
Glory Road (1963)
Farnham's Freehold (1964)
The Moon Is a Harsh Mistress (1966)
I Will Fear No Evil (1970)
Friday (1982)
Job: A Comedy of Justice (1984)
The Robert Heinlein Omnibus (1958)
The Unpleasant Profession of Jonathan Hoag (1959)
The Worlds of Robert A. Heinlein (1966)
Expanded Universe (1980)
Requiem (1992)
Take Back Your Government (1946/1992)
Tramp Royale (1954/1992)
Grumbles from the Grave (1989)
Destination Moon (1950)
Project Moonbase (1953)
Delos D. Harriman
Jubal Harshaw
Maureen Johnson
Andrew Jackson Libby
Lazarus Long
Hazel Stone
Heinlein Centennial
Heinlein Society Robert A. Heinlein Award
Robert A. Heinlein Award
Heinlein Prize for Advances in Space Commercialization
Virginia Heinlein
The Robert Heinlein Interview and Other Heinleiniana
Tribbles
Grok
The Puppet Masters
Starship Troopers
Predestination


URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Day_of_the_Triffids
Content:

The Day of the Triffids is a 1951 post-apocalyptic novel by the English science fiction author John Wyndham. After most people in the world are blinded by an apparent meteor shower, an aggressive species of plant starts killing people. Although Wyndham had already published other novels using other pen name combinations drawn from his real name, this was the first novel published as "John Wyndham".
The story has been made into the 1963 feature film of the same name, three radio drama series (in 1957, 1968 and 2001) and two TV series (in 1981 and 2009).[1] It was nominated for the International Fantasy Award in 1952, and in 2003 the novel was listed on the BBC's survey The Big Read.[2][3] It is the inspiration for the 2002 film 28 Days Later.[4] In 2021, the novel was one of six classic science fiction novels by British authors selected by Royal Mail to feature on a series of UK postage stamps.[5]


## Summary
The protagonist is Bill Masen, a biologist who has made his living working with triffids—tall, venomous, carnivorous plants capable of locomotion. Due to his background, Bill suspects they were bioengineered in the Soviet Union and accidentally released into the wild. Because of the excellent industrial quality of an oil produced by and obtained from the triffids, there is heavy triffid cultivation around the world.
The narrative begins with Bill in hospital, his eyes bandaged after having been splashed with triffid poison from a stinger. During his recovery he is told of an unexpected green meteor shower. The next morning, he learns that the light from the unusual display has rendered any who watched it blind (later in the book, Bill speculates that the "meteor shower" may have been orbiting satellite weapons, triggered accidentally). After unbandaging his eyes he finds the hospital in chaos, with staff and patients without sight. He wanders through a chaotic London full of blind inhabitants and meets wealthy novelist Josella Playton, whom he rescues after discovering her being forcibly used as a guide by a blind man. Intrigued by a single light on top of the Senate House in an otherwise darkened city, Bill and Josella discover a group of sighted survivors led by a man named Beadley, who plans to establish a colony in the countryside. They decide to join the group.
The polygamy implicit in Beadley's scheme for rebuilding society appals some group members, especially the religious Miss Durrant. However, before these plans can be put in place, a man named Wilfred Coker stages a fire at the university and kidnaps a number of sighted individuals, including Bill and Josella. They are each chained to a blind person and assigned to lead a squadron of the blind, collecting food and other supplies, all the while beset by escaped triffids and rival scavengers.
Soon Bill's followers begin to fall sick and die of an unknown disease. When he wakes one morning to find the survivors have left him, he returns to the Senate House to seek Josella but his only lead is an address left behind by Beadley's group. Joined by a repentant Coker, Bill drives to the address, a country estate called Tynsham in Wiltshire. He finds part of the Beadley group, now led by Durrant, who eventually tells him that Beadley went to Dorset a few days before he arrived; there has been no sign of Josella. Bill and Coker decide to follow Beadley, finding small groups of blind and sighted people along the way. Eventually they decide to separate, Coker returning to help at Tynsham, while Bill heads for the Sussex Downs after remembering a remark Josella made about friends she had there.
En route, Bill rescues a young sighted girl named Susan, whom he finds trapped alone at home, while her young brother lies dead in the garden, killed by a triffid. He buries the boy and takes Susan with him. A few days later, during a night of heavy rain, they see a faint light in the distance. Upon reaching it, they discover Josella and her friends.
The survivors attempt to establish a self-sufficient colony in Sussex with some success but are constantly under threat from the triffids, which mass around the fenced exterior. Several years pass, until one day a representative of Beadley's faction lands a helicopter in their yard and reports that his group has established a colony on the Isle of Wight. Durrant's talk of Dorset was a deliberate attempt to throw Bill off on his journey to find Beadley. While Bill and the others are reluctant to leave their own settlement, the group decide to see the summer out in Sussex before moving to the Isle of Wight.
Their plans are hurried by the arrival of an armoured car of the militaristic representatives of a self-appointed, despotic government. Bill recognises the leader as a ruthless young man he had encountered on a scavenging expedition in London, whom he had watched cold-bloodedly execute one of his own group who had fallen ill. The latter plans to give Bill a large number of blind people to care for and use on the farm as slave labour; he will also take Susan as hostage. Feigning agreement, Bill's group throw a party, during which they encourage the visitors to get drunk. Creeping out of the house whilst the visitors are fast asleep, they disable the armoured car by pouring honey into the fuel tank and drive through the gates, leaving them open for the triffids to pour in. The novel ends with Bill's group on the Isle of Wight, determined one day to destroy the triffids and reclaim their world.


## Publication history
In the United States, Doubleday & Company holds the 1951 copyright. A condensed version of the book also was serialized in Collier's magazine in January and February 1951. An unabridged paperback edition was published in the late 1960s, in arrangement with Doubleday, under the Crest Book imprint of Fawcett Publications World Library.[6]


## Influences
Wyndham frequently acknowledged the influence of H. G. Wells' The War of the Worlds (1897) on The Day of the Triffids[7][8]— Wells's working title had been The Day of the Tripods.
The triffids are related, in some editions of the novel, to brief mention of the theories of the Soviet agronomist Trofim Lysenko, a proponent of Lamarckism who eventually was thoroughly debunked. "In the days when information was still exchanged Russia had reported some successes. Later, however, a cleavage of methods and views had caused biology there, under a man called Lysenko, to take a different course" (Chapter 2). Lysenkoism at the time of the novel's creation was still being defended by some prominent international Stalinists.[9]
During the Blitz, Wyndham was a fire watcher and later member of the Home Guard. He witnessed the destruction of London from the rooftops of Bloomsbury. He described many scenes and incidents, including the uncanny silence of London on a Sunday morning after a heavy bombardment, in letters to his long-term partner Grace Wilson. These found their way into The Day of the Triffids.[10]


## Critical reception
The book has been praised by other science fiction writers. Karl Edward Wagner cited The Day of the Triffids as one of the thirteen best science fiction horror novels.[11] Arthur C. Clarke called it an "immortal story".[12] Anthony Boucher and J. Francis McComas praised it, saying: "rarely have the details of [the] collapse been treated with such detailed plausibility and human immediacy, and never has the collapse been attributed to such an unusual and terrifying source".[13] Forrest J. Ackerman wrote in Astounding Science Fiction that Triffids "is extraordinarily well carried out, with the exception of a somewhat anticlimactic if perhaps inevitable conclusion".[14]
Brian Aldiss coined the disparaging phrase cosy catastrophe to describe the subgenre of post-war apocalyptic fiction in which society is destroyed save for a handful of survivors, who are able to enjoy a relatively comfortable existence.[15] He singled out The Day of the Triffids as an example and described Triffids as "totally devoid of ideas".[16] However, some more recent critics have argued against this view. Margaret Atwood wrote: "one might as well call World War II—of which Wyndham was a veteran—a 'cozy' war because not everyone died in it".[17]
John Clute commented that the book was regularly chosen for school syllabuses, as it was "safe".[16] Robert M. Philmus called it derivative of better books by H. G. Wells.[16] Groff Conklin, reviewing the novel's first publication, characterised it as "a good run-of-the-mill affair" and "pleasant reading... provided you aren't out hunting science fiction masterpieces".[18]


## Cultural impact
According to director Danny Boyle, the opening hospital sequence of The Day of the Triffids inspired Alex Garland to write the screenplay for 28 Days Later (2002).[19]
The 2012 short story "How to Make a Triffid" by Kelly Lagor includes discussions of the possible genetic pathways that could be manipulated to engineer the triffids.[20]


## Themes


### Science and technology
The Day of the Triffids touches on mankind's advances in science and technology as a possible contributor to the collapse of society that's depicted in the novel.
I saw them now with a disgust that they had never roused in me before. Horrible alien things which some of us had somehow created, and which the rest of us, in our careless greed, had cultured all over the world, One could not even blame nature for them.
— Bill Masen, in The Day of the Triffids
In a master's thesis entitled Social Critique in the Major Novels of John Wyndham: Civilization's Secrets and Nature's Truths,[21] Michael Douglas Green writes about other scientific contributions to the novel's apocalypse:
The apocalypse in The Day of the Triffids is not merely a result of the creation of the triffids, however. It is instead, a sort of compound disaster; the triffids only gain free rein after another man-made horror—a satellite—goes awry. The narrator describes the advent of a sort of orbital missile (not utterly unlike an ICBM) developed in both the East and West carrying not only atomic weapons but also "such things as crop diseases, cattle diseases, radioactive dusts, viruses, and infections not only of familiar kinds, but brand-new sorts recently thought up in laboratories, all floating around up there."
— Social Critique in the Major Novels of John Wyndham: Civilization's Secrets and Nature's Truths, pp. 28–29


### Post-WWII British politics
Critics have highlighted the parallels between the triffids and the decolonization that took place in Europe after 1945. In an essay entitled "The Politics of Post-Apocalypse: Ideologies on Trial in John Wyndham's The Day of the Triffids",[8] literary critic Jerry Määttä writes:
It could be argued that one of the reasons why John Wyndham's The Day of the Triffids reached such a vast audience is that it can be read as a symbolic negotiation of the British situation in the first few years after the Second World War. Elsewhere, I have also suggested that the curiously under-analysed triffids could be read as distorted metaphors for the colonised peoples of the British Empire—then in the middle of the process of decolonisation—coming back to haunt mainland Britain, much as the Martians did in H. G. Wells' The War of the Worlds (1898), one of Wyndham's main influences.
— The Politics of Post-Apocalypse: Ideologies on Trial in John Wyndham's The Day of the Triffids 13.2, "The Politics of Post-Apocalypse: Ideologies on Trial in John Wyndham's The Day of the Triffids"
Robert Yeates, in his essay "Gender and Ethnicity in Post-Apocalyptic Suburbia",[22] proposes another connection to colonialism:
The title The Day of the Triffids shows a colonial role reversal of this kind in which humanity is no longer the most powerful species, and Masen remarks that it is "an unnatural thought that one type of creature should dominate perpetually."
— "Gender and Ethnicity in Post-Apocalyptic Suburbia", p. 112
At the time of the novel's writing there was an emerging welfare state in Great Britain after the formation of the Attlee ministry. Coker's forced shackling of sighted people to the blind echoes the sentiments that some middle-class British citizens felt in the wake of the changes introduced by the Labour party after their 1945 election victory.[8]


### Loss of identity
The novel frequently brings into question the utility of individualism during the apocalypse. Colin Manlove highlights this phenomenon in his essay "Everything Slipping Away: John Wyndham's The Day of the Triffids":[23]
Simultaneous with this process, people lose their identities. Part of this comes from the fact that all now exist in a shared situation, the catastrophe: no longer can one be an agronomist, a doctor, a farmer, a novelist, but only one more individual up against the triffids, one only real distinction being if one is sighted.


## Adaptations


### Film adaptations
London-based film producers Albert R. Broccoli and Irving Allen purchased the film rights and in 1956 hired Jimmy Sangster to write the script.[24] Sangster believed that Wyndham was one of the best science fiction novelists writing at the time and felt both honoured and "a little bit intimidated" that he was about to "start messing" with Wyndham's novel. Sangster claims he was paid for his work but never heard from the producers and the film was not made. He later said that he did not think that his script was good.[25]
A British cinematic version, directed by Steve Sekely, with a screenplay by Bernard Gordon, was filmed on location in Spain and released in July 1962.[26] Not in agreement with the novel, it suggested that the triffids arrived on Earth via spores from the meteor shower.
In September 2010, Variety announced that a 3D film version was being planned by producers Don Murphy and Michael Preger.[27]
The anime film Crayon Shin-chan: My Moving Story! Cactus Large Attack! (2015) had a similar setting with Triffids replaced by killer cacti.[28]


### Game adaptations
Prázdninová škola Lipnice, a non-profit organisation that pioneered experiential education summer camps in Czechoslovakia in the 1980s, developed an outdoor game based on the story.[29]
The Italian version of the 1983 Advanced Dungeons & Dragons "Shambling Mound" Fantasy Adventure Figure by TSR, Inc. named the creature Il Trifido dinoccolato "The slouching Triffid."
An article in issue 53 of the magazine Dragon, released in 1981, contains mechanics for triffids as monsters in Advanced Dungeons & Dragons 1st edition. The article is titled "Ways of the Triffids, The" and was written by Mark Nulver.


### Print adaptations
Marvel Comics adapted the story in the magazine Unknown Worlds of Science Fiction (1975).


### Radio adaptations
There were readings of the novel in 1953 (BBC Home Service – 15 × 15 minutes, read by Frank Duncan)
Giles Cooper adapted the novel in six 30-minute episodes for the BBC Light Programme,[30] first broadcast between 2 October and 6 November 1957. It was produced by Peter Watts.[31]
A second version of Cooper's adaptation, for BBC Radio 4, was first broadcast between 20 June and 25 July 1968. It was produced by John Powell, with music by David Cain of the BBC Radiophonic Workshop.[32][33]
It was adapted in Germany in 1968 by Westdeutscher Rundfunk (WDR) Köln (Cologne), translated by Hein Bruehl.[34] Most recently, it was re-broadcast as a four-episode series on WDR5 in January 2008.[citation needed]
It was adapted in Norway in 1969 by Norsk Rikskringkasting (NRK), translated by Knut Johansen, and most recently re-broadcast as a six-episode series on NRK in September and October 2012. The Norwegian version is also available on CD and iTunes.[35]
There were readings of the novel in 1971 (BBC Radio 4 – 10 × 15 minutes, read by Gabriel Woolf)
A 20-minute extract for schools was first broadcast on BBC Radio 4 on 21 September 1973, adapted and produced by Peter Fozzard.[citation needed]
There were readings of the novel in 1980 (BBC Radio 4/Woman's Hour – 14 × 15 minutes, read by David Ashford)
An adaptation by Lance Dann in two 45-minute episodes for the BBC World Service was first broadcast on 8 and 22 September 2001. It was directed by Rosalind Ward, with music by Simon Russell. Episode 2 was originally scheduled for 15 September 2001, but was rescheduled due to the September 11 attacks. Each episode was followed by a 15-minute documentary on the book.[citation needed]
There were readings of the novel in 2004 (BBC Radio 7 – 17 × 30 minutes, read by Roger May)


### Television adaptations
The Outer Limits episode "Specimen: Unknown", an episode of the anthology series in which humans are threatened by aggressive alien plants, and which shares some similarity with the end of the 1962 film adaptation.[36]
A six-episode (each episode 30 minutes in length) television serial version was produced by the BBC in 1981 and repeated first on UKGold in the early 1990s (as 3x50 minute episodes, as it was edited for international sales) then on BBC Four in 2006, 2007, 2009 and 2014. It starred John Duttine as Bill Masen and was fairly faithful to the novel, albeit moving the timeline to a then-contemporary setting, with Triffid oil being farmed as an energy-saving fuel additive.
In December 2009, the BBC broadcast a new version of the story, written by ER and Law & Order writer Patrick Harbinson.[37] It stars Dougray Scott as Bill Masen, Joely Richardson as Jo Playton, Brian Cox as Dennis Masen, Vanessa Redgrave as Durrant, Eddie Izzard as Torrence and Jason Priestley as Coker.[38][39] An estimated 6.1 million people viewed the first episode.[40] In this version the Triffids originally evolved in Zaire, and their oil is used as an alternative fuel, averting global warming. The elements of repopulating the Earth and the plague were overlooked in this adaptation; another difference in the plot was that the Earth was blinded by a solar flare rather than a meteor shower.
Amazon Studios announced a planned television series adaptation of the novel with Johan Renck set to direct and executive produce for Angry Films.[41]


## Sequels
Simon Clark wrote a sequel The Night of the Triffids (2001). This is set 25 years after Wyndham's book, and focuses on the adventures of Bill Masen's son David, who travels to New York, USA. Big Finish Productions adapted it as an audio play in 2014.[42] The dramatisation featuring Sam Troughton was later broadcast on BBC Radio 4 Extra in June 2016.
Simon Gould published The Land of the Triffids in 2016, continuing the story of Christina Schofield, picking up where Simon Clark's The Night of the Triffids left off.[43] However, as of 2023[update], the book is unavailable for purchase and has not been dramatised in any form.
In 2020, English science fiction and fantasy author John Whitbourn published a sequel, entitled The Age of the Triffids. Set in the Isle of Wight "Colony" in the lead-up to the Millennium, it details the rallying of survivors from across Britain for one last attempt to defeat the triffid threat. For copyright reasons, the book is not for sale outside Canada and New Zealand.[44]


## References
^ "Series: The Day of the Triffids". RadioEchoes.
^ Locus Index to SF Awards. Archived 26 June 2014 at the Wayback Machine
^ The Big Read, BBC, April 2003, archived from the original on 18 October 2012, retrieved 31 October 2012.
^ Kaye, Don (28 April 2015). "Exclusive: Ex Machina writer/director Alex Garland on 'small' sci-fi films, sentient machines and going mainstream". Syfy Wire. Archived from the original on 15 February 2020. Retrieved 25 October 2019.
^ "Stamps to feature original artworks celebrating classic science fiction novels". Yorkpress.co.uk. 9 April 2021. Retrieved 20 September 2022.
^ Wyndham, John (April 1970), The Day of the Triffids (paperback ed.), Fawcett Crest, title page, 6th printing.
^ Morris, Edmund (2003), Introduction
^ a b c Määttä, Jerry (2017). "The Politics of Post-Apocalypse: Ideologies on Trial in John Wyndham's the Day of the Triffids". Science Fiction, Ethics and the Human Condition. Springer. pp. 207–226. doi:10.1007/978-3-319-56577-4_13. ISBN 978-3-319-56575-0.
^ Link, Miles (2015). "'A Very Primitive Matter': John Wyndham on Catastrophe and Survival". The Irish Journal of Gothic and Horror Studies: 63–80, 161. ProQuest 1728716664.
^ Binns, Amy (October 2019). HIDDEN WYNDHAM : life, love, letters. GRACE JUDSON PRESS. ISBN 9780992756710.
^ Christakos, N. G. (2007), "Three By Thirteen: The Karl Edward Wagner Lists", in Szumskyj, Benjamin (ed.), Black Prometheus: A Critical Study of Karl Edward Wagner, Gothic Press.
^ Clarke, Arthur C. "Sir. Arthur Charles Clarke". Retrieved 21 June 2018. Another writer that I knew very well was John Benyon Harris, better known as John Wyndham, whose 1951 The Day of the Triffids seems an immortal story. It's often being revived in some form or another. John was a very nice guy, but unfortunately suffered from an almost fatal defect for a fiction writer: he had a private income. If he hadn't, I'm sure he'd have written much more.
^ "Recommended Reading", F&SF: 83, August 1951.
^ "Book Reviews", Astounding Science Fiction: 142, August 1951.
^ Aldiss, Brian W. (1973). Billion year spree: the history of science fiction. Weidenfeld & Nicolson. p. 293. ISBN 978-0-297-76555-4.
^ a b c Boluk, Stephanie; Lenz, Wylie (2011). Generation Zombie: Essays on the Living Dead in Modern Culture. McFarland. p. 156. ISBN 978-0-7864-8673-1.
^ Atwood, Margaret (8 September 2015). "The Forgotten Sci-Fi Classic That Reads Like a Prequel to E.T." Slate Magazine. Retrieved 25 October 2019.
^ Conklin, Groff (August 1951). "Five Star Shelf". Galaxy Science Fiction: 99.
^ Kermode, Mark (6 May 2007). "A capital place for panic attacks". The Guardian. London. Archived from the original on 8 May 2021. Retrieved 9 November 2024.
^ Lagor, Kelly (14 November 2012). "How to Make a Triffid". Tor.com. Archived from the original on 9 November 2024. Retrieved 9 November 2024.
^ Green, Michael Douglas (2000). Social critique in the major novels of John Wyndham: civilization's secrets and nature's truths (masters thesis). Concordia University.
^ Yeates, Robert (2016). "Gender and Ethnicity in Post-Apocalyptic Suburbia". Journal of the Fantastic in the Arts. 27 (3 (97)): 411–434. ISSN 0897-0521. JSTOR 26321146.
^ Manlove, C. N. (1991). "Everything Slipping Away: John Wyndham's The Day of the Triffids". Journal of the Fantastic in the Arts. 4 (1 (13)): 29–53. ISSN 0897-0521. JSTOR 43308099.
^ Meikle, Denis (2008). A History of Horrors: The Rise and Fall of the House of Hammer (revised ed.). Scarecrow Press. p. 49. ISBN 9780810863811.
^ Sangster, Jimmy (1997). Do You Want It Good or Tuesday? From Hammer Films to Hollywood! A Life in the Movies: An Autobiography. Midnight Marquee Press. pp. 43–45. ISBN 9781887664134.
^ "The Day of the Triffids". IMDb. 22 May 2013. Retrieved 22 May 2013.
^ McNary, Dave (23 September 2010). "3D triumph for 'Triffids'?". Variety. Archived from the original on 23 October 2020. Retrieved 9 November 2024.
^ "Cinema Today Review" (in Japanese). Archived from the original on 9 May 2015.
^ Zapletal, Miroslav (1990). Zlatý fond her [Golden collection of games] (in Czech). Vol. 1. Prague: Mladá fronta.
^ Street, Seán (21 April 2015). Historical Dictionary of British Radio. Rowman & Littlefield. p. 104. ISBN 9781442249233.
^ "Patrick Barr in 'THE DAY OF THE TRIFFIDS' – Light Programme – 23 October 1957 – BBC Genome". genome.ch.bbc.co.uk. 23 October 1957. Archived from the original on 16 September 2016. Retrieved 6 July 2016.
^ "The Day of the Triffids: Part 1: The End Begins". BBC Genome Beta. 20 June 1968. Retrieved 27 February 2018.
^ "The Day of the Triffids: Part 6: Strategic Withdrawal". BBC Genome Beta. 25 July 1968. Retrieved 27 February 2018.
^ Milner, Andrew (14 November 2012). Locating Science Fiction. Liverpool: Liverpool University Press. pp. Chapter 4: Radio Science Fiction and the Theory of Genre. ISBN 9781846318429. Retrieved 3 December 2019.
^ Barratt-Due, Else; Myhre, Nan Kristin (6 September 2012). "Nostalgisk grøss" (in Norwegian). NRK. Archived from the original on 10 May 2013. Retrieved 1 October 2012.
^ Schow, David J. (1998). The outer limits companion ([2nd] ed.). Hollywood, Calif.: GNP/Crescendo. p. 92. ISBN 0966516907.
^ "Coming to the BBC in 2009... The Day of the Triffids". BBC. 27 November 2008. Archived from the original on 5 September 2010. Retrieved 21 December 2009.
^ "The Day of The Triffids attracts all-star cast to BBC One". BBC Press Office. 11 February 2009. Archived from the original on 15 February 2009. Retrieved 11 February 2009.
^ Walker, Tim (3 January 2010). "The Day of the Triffids, BBC1/Tsunami: Caught on Camera, Channel 4". The Independent. London. Archived from the original on 5 November 2012. Retrieved 12 August 2012.
^ "'Triffids' remake brings in 6.1 million". TV News. Digital Spy. 3 January 2010. Archived from the original on 17 October 2012. Retrieved 12 August 2012.
^ Andreeva, Nellie (1 March 2023). "'The Day of the Triffids' TV Series in Works at Amazon With Johan Renck Directing & Angry Films Producing". Deadline Hollywood.
^ "The Night of the Triffids". Big Finish. Retrieved 25 October 2017.
^ Gould, Simon (29 December 2016). Masters, Kelly (ed.). Land of the Triffids. Independently published. ISBN 978-1-5202-5744-0.
^ The Age of the Triffids: Amazon Books. ASIN 171274982X.


## External links
Hurst, L. J., Were dead (essay), Pipex, archived from the original on 10 August 2013.
The Day of the Triffids (reader's guide), United Kingdom.
John Wyndham at IMDb
v
t
e
The Secret People
Foul Play Suspected
Stowaway to Mars
The Day of the Triffids
The Kraken Wakes
The Chrysalids
The Midwich Cuckoos
The Outward Urge
Trouble with Lichen
Chocky
Web
Plan for Chaos
"Consider Her Ways"
"Random Quest"
Jizzle
The Seeds of Time
Tales of Gooseflesh and Laughter
Consider Her Ways and Others
The Infinite Moment
Sleepers of Mars
The Best of John Wyndham
Wanderers of Time
Exiles on Asperus
No Place Like Earth
The Day of the Triffids
Village of the Damned (1960)
Quest for Love
Village of the Damned (1995)
The Day of the Triffids (1981)
Chocky
The Day of the Triffids (2009)
The Midwich Cuckoos (2022)
Triffid
The Chrysalids (radio drama)
Children of the Damned
Blackbirds at Bangpleng
The Night of the Triffids
VIAF
United States


URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Demolished_Man
Content:

The Demolished Man is a science fiction novel by American writer Alfred Bester, which won the first Hugo Award in 1953. An inverted detective story, the novel was first serialized in three parts, beginning with the January 1952 issue of Galaxy Science Fiction magazine,[1] followed by publication of the novel in 1953. The novel is dedicated to Galaxy's editor, H. L. Gold, who offered suggestions during its writing. Bester's original title was Demolition!, but Gold convinced him to change it.


## Plot introduction
The Demolished Man is a science fiction police procedural set in a future where telepathy is common, although much of its effectiveness is derived from one individual having greater telepathic skill than another.
In the 24th century, telepaths—called Espers or "peepers"—are integrated into all levels of society. They are classed according to their abilities.
All Espers can telepathically communicate amongst themselves and the more powerful Espers can overwhelm their juniors. Telepathic ability is innate and inheritable but can remain latent and undetected in untrained persons. Once recognized, natural aptitude can be developed through instruction and exercise. There is a guild to improve Espers' telepathic skills, to set and enforce ethical conduct guidelines, and to increase the Esper population through intermarriage.
Some latent telepaths are undiscovered, or are aware of their abilities but refuse to submit to Guild rule. Some are ostracized as punishment for breaking the rules. One character in the story has suffered this fate for ten years, leaving him desperate for even vicarious contact with other telepaths.


## Plot summary
Ben Reich is the paranoid, impetuous owner of Monarch Utilities & Resources, a commercial cartel that the Reich family has possessed for generations. Monarch Utilities & Resources is in danger of bankruptcy because of its chief rival, the D'Courtney Cartel, headed by the older Craye D'Courtney. Reich suffers recurring nightmares in which a "Man with No Face" persecutes him.
Desperate to end his suffering, Reich contacts D'Courtney and proposes a merger of their concerns but Reich's damaged psychological state causes him to misread D'Courtney's positive response as a refusal.[2] Frustrated and desperate, Reich determines to kill D'Courtney. The presence of "peepers" has prevented the commission of murder for more than seventy years so Reich devises an elaborate plan to ensure his freedom. If caught Reich will certainly face "Demolition", a terrible punishment described only at the end of the story.
Reich hires an Esper to "run interference" for him—hiding his murderous thoughts from any peepers present at the scene of the planned crime. Reich bribes Dr. Augustus ("Gus") Tate, a prominent peeper psychiatrist, and uses him to mentally steal information about D'Courtney's planned attendance at a party. To further conceal his intentions from telepaths, Reich visits a songwriter, Duffy Wygand, to teach him a jingle that makes his real thoughts hard to read.
From Monarch's research facility, Reich secures a small flash grenade which can disrupt a victim's perception of time by temporarily destroying the eyes' rhodopsin. He acquires an antique (20th-century) handgun from a pawn shop, making sure to have the bullets removed from the cartridges when he buys it. He knows how to replace the bullet in the handgun's ammunition with a gelatin capsule filled with water in order to eliminate ballistics evidence.
At the party, he influences the host to play a game of Sardines in total darkness. Reich executes his plan during the game but there is an unforeseen hitch: at the moment he shoots D'Courtney, D'Courtney's daughter Barbara witnesses the murder, struggles with Reich, grabs the gun, and runs away. She is later found suffering severe psychological shock that renders her catatonic and mute. Nobody but the party's hostess Maria knew Barbara was with her father. Reich recovers his composure, returns to the party and pretends to be lost. Just as he is about to leave, completing his getaway, a drop of blood from D'Courtney's body in the room above lands on him, and the party ends in chaos as the police are called.
A telepathic police detective, Lincoln Powell, is assigned to the case. As telepathically gathered evidence is legally inadmissible in court, but can be used to guide an investigation, the detective is obliged to assemble the murder case with traditional police procedures and to establish motive, means, and opportunity. The detective manages to read Reich's thoughts, sees that he is the murderer, and asks him to surrender. Reich refuses, relishing the thrill of the hunt to come.
Both sides center on finding and questioning (or, in Reich's case, silencing) Barbara D'Courtney. Although Reich finds her first, he is unable to kill her before Powell rescues her. The pursuit traverses the Solar System as Reich escapes the police and a series of mysterious assassination attempts. Others are attacked also: during Powell's attempt to interrogate the pawnbroker from whom Reich bought the gun, an unknown person attacks the pawnshop with a "harmonic gun" which kills by resonant sonic vibration. Reich tries but fails to murder Hassop, his own chief of communications (to try to prevent him from assisting the police with his knowledge of the corporate codes), and Powell succeeds in abducting Hassop.
Powell has already established opportunity and, eventually, method through discovery of a tiny fragment of gelatin in the body. Just as Powell believes that he has wrapped the case up entirely, the interrogation of Hassop yields disturbing results: D'Courtney had accepted the merger proposal. That dashes Powell's case; as he remarks, no court in the Solar System would believe Reich murdered D'Courtney when D'Courtney was needed alive for the merger (which would save Reich and give him all the power and wealth he dreamed of) to succeed.
Reich's tortured mental state is unknown to Reich himself, so Powell does not suspect that the motive for the murder was something other than financial. After more attempts on his life, and more dreams of the "Man with No Face", Reich attempts to kill Powell. Powell easily disarms him and then reads his mind. Suddenly Powell recognizes that the forces behind Reich's crime are greater than anticipated. He asks the help of every Esper in attempting to arrest Reich, channeling their collective mental energy through Powell in the dangerous telepathic procedure called the "Mass Cathexis Measure". He justifies this by claiming that Reich is an embryonic megalomaniac who will remake society in his own twisted image if not stopped.
Powell uses the power to construct a solipsistic fantasy for Reich to experience. One by one, he removes elements of reality, beginning with the stars in the sky, until Reich is left believing that he is the only real being in a world constructed around him, as a game. Finally Reich is left facing the "Man with No Face", who is both himself and Craye D'Courtney.
Reich is revealed to be the natural son of Craye D'Courtney, from an affair with Reich's mother—Reich's hatred of him was probably due to a latent, telepathic knowledge of that fact. Reich's knowledge is not explicitly stated but Barbara D'Courtney, whom Powell discovers to be Reich's half-sister, is herself revealed to be a peeper. The assassination attempts on Reich were carried out by Reich himself as a result of his disturbed state. Once arrested and convicted, Reich is sentenced to the dreaded Demolition—the stripping away of his memories and the upper layers of his personality, emptying his mind for re-education. This 24th-century society uses psychological demolition because it recognizes the social value of strong personalities able to successfully defy the law, seeking the salvaging of positive traits while ridding the person of the evil consciousness of the criminal.


## Reception
Reviewer Groff Conklin characterized The Demolished Man as "a magnificent novel... as fascinating a study of character as I have ever read".[3] Boucher and McComas praised the novel as "a taut, surrealistic melodrama [and] a masterful compounding of science and detective fiction", singling out Bester's depiction of a "ruthless and money-mad [society] that is dominated and being subtly reshaped by telepaths" as particularly accomplished.[4] Imagination reviewer Mark Reinsberg received the novel favorably, citing its "brilliant depictions of future civilization and 24th century social life".[5]
After criticizing unrealistic science fiction, Carl Sagan in 1978 listed The Demolished Man as among stories "that are so tautly constructed, so rich in the accommodating details of an unfamiliar society that they sweep me along before I have even a chance to be critical".[6] For a 1996 reprint, author Harry Harrison wrote an introduction in which he called it "a first novel that was, and still is, one of the classics".[7] Richard Beard described the book as "full of vigorous action", saying, "the ripping pace of the book becomes part of what it's about".[8]
In an SF Site Featured Review, Todd Richmond wrote that the book is "a complicated game of manoeuvering, evasion, and deception, as Reich and Polwell [sic] square off against one another", adding:
The game is a very interesting one, because while Reich is a very rich man and has considerable resources, Polwell [sic] has an entire network of peepers to help him gather information and obtain evidence... The best part of Bester's story is its timelessness... There are few references to outlandish or dated technology (with the exception of a punch card computer!) or outrageous social practices or fashions. While Bester's future isn't utopia, neither is it a post-apocalyptic nightmare... Bester extrapolates his view of the 50s forward in time, recognizing that while things like technology will change, basic human nature will not. The Demolished Man is a welcome change for those tired of modern trilogies and series.[9]
In his "Books" column for F&SF, Damon Knight selected Bester's novel as one of the 10 best sf books of the 1950s.[10]
The Demolished Man won the 1953 Hugo Award for Best Novel and placed second for the year's International Fantasy Award for fiction.[11] The Orion Publishing Group chose the novel as its fourteenth selection for its series SF Masterworks in 1999.


## Characters


### Major characters
Ben Reich, lacks moral integrity and is willing to take considerable risks in order to see his wishes carried out. However, he is a very charming man to many around him, especially at the story's beginning when his desperation is still in check. His personal mantra is: "Make your enemies by choice, not by accident". He is about forty, and in his own words "wouldn't trade places with God, or looks with the Devil". His ancestors have left him, in book form, advice about how to pursue his ambitions. One chapter, "Murder", lays out some ideas, including using the Sardine game. At the same time, he is tormented by dreams of "The Man With No Face", which he initially believes is the face of Murder itself.
Lincoln Powell is a Class 1 Esper in his thirties. He is Prefect of Police, which in this case means chief detective. He is handsome, intelligent, charming, and well-liked. As the story opens, he is being considered for the Presidency of the Esper Guild, but since he is single and not married to another Esper, as Guild policy requires, he is disqualified. He lives alone in a house, since highly-skilled Espers cannot live in crowded apartment blocks where they are bombarded by the thoughts of others. He is said to have a dual personality; behind the correct role of model Esper and perfect cop hides Dishonest Abe, a compulsive liar. Often, Dishonest Abe takes the lead in conversation, with Powell finding himself lying in earnest to anybody, just for the sake of amusing himself. He invents absurd tales of heroic cops who do not exist, or accounts of how the stress of his job causes him to become left-handed temporarily. His most notorious lie gave rise to the question "Who stole the weather, Powell?" which other peepers use to embarrass him, even though few actually know the details of the incident.
Barbara D'Courtney, a very pretty young blonde woman, daughter of Craye D'Courtney, whom Reich pursues to kill and with whom Powell falls in love despite the fact that, according to the Guild rules, he must marry an Esper. However she is revealed to be a latent Esper herself. Having witnessed her father's murder, she becomes catatonic. She is given a treatment that regresses her to childhood mentally, expecting that she will come to terms with the tragedy as she returns to her adult self over a period of weeks. During this time, Powell attempts to extract information from her subconscious, but is blocked by strange images including one of her and Reich as conjoined twins. This is a clue on the trail to discovering Reich's real motive for murder.
Mary Noyes, an Esper 2 who is a close friend of Lincoln Powell. She is in fact in love with Powell, but he does not return the affection. Since Guild members are required to marry other Espers as part of the Guild's "Eugenic Plan", she hopes he will eventually marry her anyway. When it becomes obvious to her that Powell, in the process of peeping Barbara D'Courtney, has fallen in love with her instead, she becomes angry and distant.
Dr. Augustus "Gus" Tate, psychiatrist and Esper 1, who becomes Reich's ally in murdering Craye D'Courtney. Although he makes millions in fees from his practice, Tate has to pay 95% in taxes to the Esper Guild to further its education, outreach, and eugenics programs. He is a member of the ultra-right-wing "League of Esper Patriots". Reich offers him riches beyond his dreams, a promise that Tate verifies by peeping Reich. In return, Tate warns Reich of Espers that threaten him, peeps the details for D'Courtney's visit to New York from D'Courtney's own physician, Sam @kins, and then after the murder participates in the cover up, peeping the investigators. Tate also finds from his peeping that Reich's motives are not what he believes, and that the dreams of the "Man with No Face" will not stop when D'Courtney is dead. He refuses to tell Reich the truth about the dreams, believing this gives him a hold over his partner in crime. He dies when Keno Quizzard's men attack Jerry Church's pawn shop in an attempt to kill Lincoln Powell.


### Minor characters
Keno Quizzard, a blind albino (a characterization also in The Stars My Destination) leader of an underworld organization employing "gimpsters" (gangsters), hired by Reich to help find Barbara D'Courtney. Eventually Quizzard is lured into space where he has an "accident" while traveling with Reich.
Chooka Frood is a corrupt brothel keeper. She keeps a bodyguard (a possible friend-companion-lover) named Magda who has red eyes, laughs continuously, dresses in leather and studs, and is apt to attack at the slightest provocation. Chooka is also a latent telepath, a fact that she uses in her fortune-telling act in the bizarre basement of the brothel. The building is part of Bastion West Side, the site of the last great battle of a war. The fires and explosions caused melted glass and pigments from a ceramics factory to flow into the basement, resulting in a multicolored luminescent floor. The rest of the building consists of boudoirs, voyeur chamber, and "The Coop", a network of rooms that can be used to hide fugitives. It is in one of these rooms that Barbara D'Courtney is found, apparently having been scooped off the street by Chooka's pimps after wandering away from the Beaumont house in a catatonic state. Chooka had been using her in the fortune-telling act, though this is not described.
Duffy Wyg& (read "Wygand"), the composer of the "'Tenser', said the Tensor" jingle. "To Reich she was the epitome of the modern career girl—the virgin seductress",[12] who seems to crave either humiliation or conquest by men.
Sam @kins (read "Atkins"), Esper 1 MD, is a top psychiatrist like Gus Tate. Unlike Tate he does not resent his Guild taxes and throws himself into charity work. His home on Venus is full of charity cases and hangers-on. He is a member of the Environmental Clique, who believe that Esper ability exists in all people and can be brought out by training. He was also treating Craye D'Courtney, whose personality was disintegrating under, in his belief, unfounded guilt over child abandonment (the child being Reich). Powell consults Atkins to determine if D'Courtney committed suicide, and in the process learns that Tate had asked him about D'Courtney, apparently on Reich's behalf.
Jerry Church, Esper 2 (the "2" is struck through with a "/" in the original text) is an ostracized Esper who once helped Reich profit by reading the minds of business rivals. He runs a pawn shop, from which Reich obtains the gun he uses to kill D'Courtney. Reich made millions from Church, but Church has lost everything. No Esper will even talk to him, let alone communicate with him telepathically. At one point in the book, he stands outside Powell's house, eavesdropping on the Esper party inside, so great is his need for that kind of contact. Powell notices him and offers him a drink, but Jerry resents his pity, throws it back at him, and runs off. After the murder, Jerry passes on information about Barbara D'Courtney's whereabouts to Keno Quizzard, leading Reich to find her at Chooka Frood's just as Powell, alerted by his own investigation, arrives. Later, Keno's men attack his shop with him, Powell, and Tate inside. Tate, foreseeing that his criminal involvement will be his undoing, commits suicide by allowing himself to be destroyed by the effects of the harmonic gun. Powell persuades Jerry to turn against Reich, blaming him for the attack. Jerry's testimony about the gun purchase is a vital piece of evidence.
Maria Beaumont, a Manhattan socialite known as the "Gilt Corpse". Her body has been surgically enhanced to render it, in the novel's terminology, "pneumatic", a term used in similar context in Brave New World. She flaunts her body at every opportunity. Craye D'Courtney stays at her house when in New York, and it is this that gives Reich his opportunity. He sends Maria an ancient book of party games in which he has made sure that only the game of "Sardines" is legible, knowing that she will insist on playing it at the party, making the entire house pitch-dark in the process. Maria adds her own flourish by insisting that everyone be naked while playing.


### Other characters
The novel has several other characters who only marginally participate in the plot:
"Wynken, Blynken, and Nod" - three telepaths with eidetic memory who act as Lincoln Powell's personal secretaries, walking encyclopedias, and recorders of his conversations with officials such as Police Commissioner Crabbe. For instance, when Powell is seeking clearance from Crabbe to pursue Reich, they remind him of a previous conversation where Crabbe admitted that Reich had supported him when he ran for Solar Senator. They also are privy to his personal secrets, mostly embarrassing episodes of his "Dishonest Abe" persona.
Snim Asj - a stereotypical punk and street hustler who is one of Chooka Frood's tenants. Threatened with eviction for non-payment of rent, he protests that Chooka is making a fortune from the "yellow-head girl" (Barbara D'Courtney). While attempting to raise cash, he spreads the story around on the street, resulting in both Reich and Powell hearing of where Barbara can be found.
T'Sung is the current President of the Esper Guild. Powell enters his office while he is dictating an angry letter to the League of Esper Patriots. T'Sung is pugnacious and blustering, yelling at his secretaries while exchanging telepathic jibes with Powell. The secretaries are accustomed to this, knowing that it is his way of dealing with the stress of the job. T'Sung wants Powell to marry a peeper as soon as possible so that he can take on the job himself.
De Santis is the head of the crime lab who investigates the murder scene, and later is in charge of constructing the model simulation of the crime for presentation to the District Attorney. He is irritable at the best of times. Powell is "peppery" with him because De Santis is "comfortable in no other relationship". The lack of evidence at the crime scene drives him to distraction. The only recoverable evidence is a piece of gelatin, which he interprets to mean that D'Courtney was eating candy, an impossibility given that he had throat cancer.
Crabbe is the Police Commissioner, and is reluctant to support Powell's pursuit of Reich. When Powell and his staff are preparing their presentation for the District Attorney, Crabbe bursts in to insist that they end the persecution of his "good friend, Ben Reich". Powell "accidentally" sets off one of Reich's tiny rhodopsin-ionizing capsules under his nose, rendering him unconscious. Later, after Powell's case collapses, Reich goes to see the Commissioner. Crabbe offers profuse apologies, trying to divert Reich into supporting his political ambitions while assuring him that Powell will suffer. Only at the end, as Powell explains the real reasons behind Reich's crime, and how he exposed it, does Crabbe appear sympathetic. Even then, after the interview Powell admits to having manipulated Crabbe to ensure his future support.
Monarch's Chief of Personnel Recruitment (never actually named) is an Esper 2 with a passion for workplace efficiency. In his own words, telepathy is just another skill subject to work-time requirements. As Reich arrives at Monarch, ready to offer merger to D'Courtney, the Chief is lambasting his staff for sending him unsuitable candidates for final review. He aims to vet at least 6 of them per hour for his 8-hour day, with no more than 35% rejections. He then insists on Reich hiring Blonn, a Class 1 Esper, to vet Esper candidates. He justifies this by quoting the time that it would take him to thoroughly vet Esper 3 and Esper 2 candidates, finishing by saying that he could not vet an Esper 1 at all. In doing so, he sets out some of the basic story information: that in the Guild there are about 100,000 Class 3 Espers, 10,000 Class 2 Espers and 1,000 Class 1 Espers. At the same time, Reich's own Esper secretary is making jibes telepathically, which is typical of the irreverent culture of Espers as it is depicted in the novel.
"Old Man Mose" is the "Mosaic Multiplex Prosecution Computor" of the District Attorney's office. It appears briefly after Powell believes he has completed the case against Reich. The machine is, in the words of one character, "kittenish", humorously printing out apparently nonsensical legal language when first switched on. Its hardware and actions are described as if it were a person. All major cases have to be reviewed by Mose. Initially the machine rejects the case for "insufficient documentation of passion motive". This is another indication that Reich's motivations were not what even he thought. Mose is persuaded to focus on the profit motive, and produces a favorable prediction. At that point, the actual reply D'Courtney sent to Reich's merger offer appears, showing that there was no profit motive. The case against Reich collapses.


## Typography
Bester played with typographic symbols when constructing various characters' names. This gave "Wyg&" for "Wygand", "@kins" for "Atkins", and "¼Maine" for "Quartermaine". He also used overtyping to strike out the "2" in Jerry Church's label of "Esper 2", to show that he has been expelled from the Esper community.


## Major themes
Jo Walton has said that The Demolished Man is shaped by Freudian psychology, comparing it to The Last Battle's relation to Christianity, and emphasizing that the resolution of the plot only makes sense in a Freudian context: Reich's hatred of D'Courtney is motivated by oedipal feelings.[13] Writer Richard Beard thought the Freudian aspects dubious: "Not all his future projections have worn so well. Reich's motives are stiffly dependent on Freudian theory, but most glaringly Bester fails to predict any type of feminism. The words girl and pretty always come as a pair."[8]


## Adaptations
In 1959, novelist Thomas Pynchon applied for a Ford Foundation Fellowship to work with an opera company, proposing to write, among other possibilities, an adaptation of The Demolished Man. The application was turned down.[citation needed]
Since reading the novel as a young man, director Brian De Palma has considered adapting it for film.[14][15] Lack of financing has long since kept the film unproduced.
The Demolished Man was adapted for German radio by RIAS Berlin in 1973 under the title Demolition. It was the first radio drama recorded with the dummy head recording method.[16]
The Demolished Man was adapted for Norwegian NRK Radio in 1981 under the title Demolisjon.[17]


## In popular culture
Donald Fagen of the band Steely Dan said of their hit song "Deacon Blues":
The concept of the "expanding man" that opens the song may have been inspired by Alfred Bester's The Demolished Man. Walter and I were major sci-fi fans. The guy in the song imagines himself ascending to the levels of evolution, "expanding" his mind, his spiritual possibilities, and his options in life.[18]


## References
^ Von Ruff, Al. "Alfred Bester - Summary Bibliography". Internet Speculative Fiction Database. Retrieved October 2, 2012.
^ The two corporations use a set of four-letter commercial codes; D'Courtney replies WWHG, which according to the codebook listed in the opening pages means "Accept Offer", but Reich assumes it means rejection.
^ "Galaxy's 5 Star Shelf", Galaxy Science Fiction, September 1953, p.121-22
^ "Recommended Reading", The Magazine of Fantasy & Science Fiction, July 1953, p. 84.
^ "Imagination Science Fiction Library", Imagination, June 1953, p. 144
^ Sagan, Carl (May 28, 1978). "Growing up with Science Fiction". The New York Times. p. SM7. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved December 12, 2018.
^ Bester, Alfred (1996). The Demolished Man. New York: Vintage Books. p. viii.
^ a b Beard, Richard (August 26, 2011). "Book Of A Lifetime: The Demolished Man, By Alfred Bester". The Independent. Retrieved October 2, 2012.
^ Richmond, Todd (2000). "The Demolished Man". SF Site. Retrieved October 2, 2012.
^ "Books", F&SF, April 1960, p.99
^ "Recommended Reading", F&SF, November 1954, p.96.
^ Bester, Alfred (1996). The Demolished Man. New York: Vintage Books. p. 41.
^ Telepaths, murder and typographical tricks: Alfred Bester’s The Demolished Man, by Jo Walton, at Tor.com, October 22, 2010 (retrieved January 4, 2011)
^ De Palma, Brian; Laurence F. Knapp (2003). Brian De Palma: Interviews. Jackson, Mississippi: University Press of Mississippi. pp. 167–168. ISBN 9781578065165.
^ Farris, John. The Demolished Man: Screenplay. Retrieved October 2, 2012.
^ Bülow, Ralf (August 31, 2013). "Vor 40 Jahren: Ein Kunstkopf für binaurale Stereophonie". Heise News (in German). Hannover: Heinz Heise. Retrieved July 27, 2014.
^ NRK. "Demolisjon". NRK. Retrieved March 27, 2021.
^ Anatomy of a Song: The Oral History of 45 Iconic Hits That Changed Rock, R&B ...


## Further reading
Chalker, Jack L.; Owings, Mark (1998). The Science-Fantasy Publishers: A Bibliographic History, 1923-1998. Westminster, MD and Baltimore: Mirage Press. pp. 593–594.
Tuck, Donald H. (1974). The Encyclopedia of Science Fiction and Fantasy. Chicago: Advent. p. 43. ISBN 0-911682-20-1.


## External links
The Demolished Man title listing at the Internet Speculative Fiction Database
The Demolished Man serialized in Galaxy, parts 1, 2, and 3 at the Internet Archive
v
t
e
The Demolished Man (1953)
Who He? (1953)
The Stars My Destination (1956)
The Computer Connection (1975)
Golem100 (1980)
The Deceivers (1981)
Tender Loving Rage (1991)
Psychoshop (with Roger Zelazny) (1998)
"Time Is the Traitor" (1953)
"Star Light, Star Bright" (1953)
"5,271,009" (1954)
"Fondly Fahrenheit" (1954)
"The Men Who Murdered Mohammed" (1958)
"The Pi Man" (1959)
"Something Up There Likes Me" (1973)
"The Four-Hour Fugue" (1974)
Starburst (1958)
The Dark Side of the Earth (1964)
An Alfred Bester Omnibus (1968)
Starlight: The Great Short Fiction of Alfred Bester (1976)
The Light Fantastic Volume 1: The Short Fiction of Alfred Bester (1976)
Star Light, Star Bright: The Short Fiction of Alfred Bester, Volume 2 (1976)
The Light Fantastic Volume 2: The Short Fiction of Alfred Bester (1976)
Virtual Unrealities (1997)
Redemolished (2000)
The Life and Death of a Satellite (1966)
v
t
e
The Sword in the Stone by T. H. White (1939)
Slan by A. E. van Vogt (1941)
Beyond This Horizon by Anson MacDonald (1943)
Conjure Wife by Fritz Leiber (1944)
Shadow Over Mars by Leigh Brackett (1945)
The Mule by Isaac Asimov (1946)
Farmer in the Sky by Robert A. Heinlein (1951)
Fahrenheit 451 by Ray Bradbury (1954)
The Demolished Man by Alfred Bester (1953)
They'd Rather Be Right (aka: The Forever Machine) by Mark Clifton and Frank Riley (1955)
Double Star by Robert A. Heinlein (1956)
The Big Time by Fritz Leiber (1958)
A Case of Conscience by James Blish (1959)
Starship Troopers by Robert A. Heinlein (1960)
A Canticle for Leibowitz by Walter M. Miller, Jr. (1961)
Stranger in a Strange Land by Robert A. Heinlein (1962)
The Man in the High Castle by Philip K. Dick (1963)
Here Gather the Stars (aka: Way Station) by Clifford D. Simak (1964)
The Wanderer by Fritz Leiber (1965)
Dune by Frank Herbert / ...And Call Me Conrad (aka: This Immortal) by Roger Zelazny (1966)
The Moon Is a Harsh Mistress by Robert A. Heinlein (1967)
Lord of Light by Roger Zelazny (1968)
Stand on Zanzibar by John Brunner (1969)
The Left Hand of Darkness by Ursula K. Le Guin (1970)
Ringworld by Larry Niven (1971)
To Your Scattered Bodies Go by Philip José Farmer (1972)
The Gods Themselves by Isaac Asimov (1973)
Rendezvous with Rama by Arthur C. Clarke (1974)
The Dispossessed by Ursula K. Le Guin (1975)
The Forever War by Joe Haldeman (1976)
Where Late the Sweet Birds Sang by Kate Wilhelm (1977)
Gateway by Frederik Pohl (1978)
Dreamsnake by Vonda N. McIntyre (1979)
The Fountains of Paradise by Arthur C. Clarke (1980)
The Snow Queen by Joan D. Vinge (1981)
Downbelow Station by C. J. Cherryh (1982)
Foundation's Edge by Isaac Asimov (1983)
Startide Rising by David Brin (1984)
Neuromancer by William Gibson (1985)
Ender's Game by Orson Scott Card (1986)
Speaker for the Dead by Orson Scott Card (1987)
The Uplift War by David Brin (1988)
Cyteen by C. J. Cherryh (1989)
Hyperion by Dan Simmons (1990)
The Vor Game by Lois McMaster Bujold (1991)
Barrayar by Lois McMaster Bujold (1992)
A Fire Upon the Deep by Vernor Vinge / Doomsday Book by Connie Willis (1993)
Green Mars by Kim Stanley Robinson (1994)
Mirror Dance by Lois McMaster Bujold (1995)
The Diamond Age by Neal Stephenson (1996)
Blue Mars by Kim Stanley Robinson (1997)
Forever Peace by Joe Haldeman (1998)
To Say Nothing of the Dog by Connie Willis (1999)
A Deepness in the Sky by Vernor Vinge (2000)
Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire by J. K. Rowling (2001)
American Gods by Neil Gaiman (2002)
Hominids by Robert J. Sawyer (2003)
Paladin of Souls by Lois McMaster Bujold (2004)
Jonathan Strange & Mr Norrell by Susanna Clarke (2005)
Spin by Robert Charles Wilson (2006)
Rainbows End by Vernor Vinge (2007)
The Yiddish Policemen's Union by Michael Chabon (2008)
The Graveyard Book by Neil Gaiman (2009)
The Windup Girl by Paolo Bacigalupi / The City & the City by China Miéville (2010)
Blackout/All Clear by Connie Willis (2011)
Among Others by Jo Walton (2012)
Redshirts by John Scalzi (2013)
Ancillary Justice by Ann Leckie (2014)
The Three-Body Problem by Cixin Liu, translated by Ken Liu (2015)
The Fifth Season by N. K. Jemisin (2016)
The Obelisk Gate by N. K. Jemisin (2017)
The Stone Sky by N. K. Jemisin (2018)
The Calculating Stars by Mary Robinette Kowal (2019)
A Memory Called Empire by Arkady Martine (2020)
Network Effect by Martha Wells (2021)
A Desolation Called Peace by Arkady Martine (2022)
Nettle & Bone by T. Kingfisher (2023)
Some Desperate Glory by Emily Tesh (2024)


URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fahrenheit_451
Content:

Fahrenheit 451 is a 1953 dystopian novel by American writer Ray Bradbury.[4] It presents a future American society where books have been outlawed and "firemen" burn any that are found.[5] The novel follows in the viewpoint of Guy Montag, a fireman who becomes disillusioned with his role of censoring literature and destroying knowledge, eventually quitting his job and committing himself to the preservation of literary and cultural writings.
Fahrenheit 451 was written by Bradbury during the Second Red Scare and the McCarthy era, inspired by the book burnings in Nazi Germany and by ideological repression in the Soviet Union.[6] Bradbury's claimed motivation for writing the novel has changed multiple times. In a 1956 radio interview, Bradbury said that he wrote the book because of his concerns about the threat of burning books in the United States.[7] In later years, he described the book as a commentary on how mass media reduces interest in reading literature.[8] In a 1994 interview, Bradbury cited political correctness as an allegory for the censorship in the book, calling it "the real enemy these days" and labeling it as "thought control and freedom of speech control".[9]
The writing and theme within Fahrenheit 451 was explored by Bradbury in some of his previous short stories. Between 1947 and 1948, Bradbury wrote "Bright Phoenix", a short story about a librarian who confronts a "Chief Censor", who burns books. An encounter Bradbury had in 1949 with the police inspired him to write the short story "The Pedestrian" in 1951. In "The Pedestrian", a man going for a nighttime walk in his neighborhood is harassed and detained by the police. In the society of "The Pedestrian", citizens are expected to watch television as a leisurely activity, a detail that would be included in Fahrenheit 451. Elements of both "Bright Phoenix" and "The Pedestrian" would be combined into The Fireman, a novella published in Galaxy Science Fiction in 1951. Bradbury was urged by Stanley Kauffmann, an editor at Ballantine Books, to make The Fireman into a full novel. Bradbury finished the manuscript for Fahrenheit 451 in 1953, and the novel was published later that year.
Upon its release, Fahrenheit 451 was a critical success, albeit with notable dissenters; the novel's subject matter led to its censorship in apartheid South Africa and various schools in the United States.[citation needed] In 1954, Fahrenheit 451 won the American Academy of Arts and Letters Award in Literature and the Commonwealth Club of California Gold Medal.[10][11][12] It later won the Prometheus "Hall of Fame" Award in 1984[13] and a "Retro" Hugo Award in 2004.[14] Bradbury was honored with a Spoken Word Grammy nomination for his 1976 audiobook version.[15] The novel has been adapted into films, stage plays, and video games. Film adaptations of the novel include a 1966 film directed by François Truffaut starring Oskar Werner as Guy Montag and a 2018 television film directed by Ramin Bahrani starring Michael B. Jordan as Montag, both of which received a mixed critical reception. Bradbury himself published a stage play version in 1979 and helped develop a 1984 interactive fiction video game of the same name, as well as a collection of his short stories titled A Pleasure to Burn.[16] Two BBC Radio dramatizations were also produced.


## Historical and biographical context
The House Un-American Activities Committee (HUAC), formed in 1938 to investigate American citizens and organizations suspected of having communist ties, held hearings in 1947 to investigate alleged communist influence in Hollywood movie-making.[17] The government's interference in the affairs of artists and creative types infuriated Bradbury;[18] he was concerned about the workings of his government, and a late 1949 nighttime encounter with an overzealous police officer would inspire Bradbury to write "The Pedestrian", a short story which would go on to become "The Fireman" and then Fahrenheit 451. The rise of Senator Joseph McCarthy's McCarthyism persecution of accused communists, beginning in 1950, deepened Bradbury's contempt for government overreach.[19][20]
The Golden Age of Radio occurred between the early 1920s to the late 1950s, during Bradbury's early life, while the transition to the Golden Age of Television began right around the time he started to work on the stories that would eventually lead to Fahrenheit 451. Bradbury saw these forms of media as a threat to the reading of books, indeed as a threat to society, as he believed they could act as a distraction from important affairs. This contempt for mass media and technology would express itself through Mildred and her friends and is an important theme in the book.[21]
Bradbury's lifelong passion for books began at an early age. After he graduated from high school, his family could not afford for him to attend college, so Bradbury began spending time at the Los Angeles Public Library where he educated himself.[22] As a frequent visitor to his local libraries in the 1920s and 1930s, he recalls being disappointed because they did not stock popular science fiction novels, like those of H. G. Wells, because, at the time, they were not deemed literary enough. Between this and learning about the destruction of the Library of Alexandria,[23] a great impression was made on Bradbury about the vulnerability of books to censure and destruction.
Later, as a teenager, Bradbury was horrified by the Nazi book burnings stating, "When I was fifteen years old, Hitler burned books in the streets of Berlin. And it terrified me".[24] Bradbury was also influenced by Joseph Stalin's campaign of political repression, the Great Purge, in which writers and poets, among many others, were arrested and often executed, stating, "They burned the authors instead of the books."[6]


## Plot summary


### "The Hearth and the Salamander"
In a distant future,[note 1][25] Guy Montag is a fireman employed to burn outlawed books, along with the houses they are hidden in. One fall night while returning from work, he meets his new neighbor Clarisse McClellan, whose free-thinking ideals and liberating spirit cause him to question his life and perceived happiness. Montag returns home to find that his wife Mildred has overdosed on sleeping pills, and he calls for medical attention. Two EMTs pump her stomach and change her blood. After they leave to rescue another overdose victim, Montag overhears Clarisse and her family talking about their illiterate society. Shortly afterward, Montag's mind is bombarded with Clarisse's subversive thoughts and the memory of Mildred's near-death. Over the next few days, Clarisse meets Montag each night as he walks home. Clarisse's simple pleasures and interests make her an outcast among her peers, and she is forced to go to therapy for her behavior. Montag looks forward to the meetings, but one day, Clarisse goes missing.[26]
In the following days, while he and other firemen are ransacking the book-filled house of an old woman and drenching it in kerosene, Montag steals a book. The woman refuses to leave her house and her books, choosing instead to light a match and burn herself alive. Jarred by the suicide, Montag returns home and hides the book under his pillow. Montag asks Mildred if she has heard anything about Clarisse. She reveals that Clarisse's family moved away after Clarisse was hit by a speeding car and died four days ago. Dismayed by her failure to mention this earlier, Montag uneasily tries to fall asleep. Outside he suspects the presence of "The Mechanical Hound", an eight-legged[27] robotic dog-like creature that resides in the firehouse and aids the firemen in hunting book hoarders.
Montag awakens ill the next morning. Mildred tries to care for her husband but finds herself more involved in the "parlor wall" entertainment in the living room – large televisions filling the walls. Montag suggests he should take a break from being a fireman, and Mildred panics over the thought of losing the house and her parlor wall "family". Captain Beatty, Montag's fire chief, visits Montag to see how he is doing. Sensing his concerns, Beatty recounts the history of how books had lost their value and how the firemen were adapted for their current role: over decades, people began to embrace new media (like film and television), sports, and an ever-quickening pace of life. Books were abridged or degraded to accommodate shorter attention spans. At the same time, advances in technology resulted in nearly all buildings being made with fireproof materials, and firemen preventing fires were no longer necessary. The government then instead turned the firemen into officers of society's peace of mind: instead of putting out fires, they were charged with starting them, specifically to burn books, which were condemned as sources of confusing and depressing thoughts that complicated people's lives. After an awkward exchange between Mildred and Montag over the book hidden under his pillow, Beatty becomes suspicious and casually adds a passing threat before leaving; he says that if a fireman had a book, he would be asked to burn it within the following twenty-four hours. If he refused, the other firemen would come and burn it for him. The encounter leaves Montag shaken.
Montag reveals to Mildred that, over the last year, he has accumulated books that are hidden in their ceiling. In a panic, Mildred grabs a book and rushes to throw it in the kitchen incinerator, but Montag subdues her and says they are going to read the books to see if they have value. If they do not, he promises the books will be burned and their lives will return to normal.


### "The Sieve and the Sand"
Mildred refuses to go along with Montag's plan, questioning why she or anyone else should care about books. Montag goes on a rant about Mildred's suicide attempt, Clarisse's disappearance and death, the woman who burned herself, and the imminent war that goes ignored by the masses. He suggests that perhaps the books of the past have messages that can save society from its own destruction. Mildred remains unconvinced.
Conceding that Mildred is a lost cause, Montag needs help to understand the books. He remembers an old man named Faber, an English professor before books were banned, whom he once met in a park. Montag visits Faber's home carrying a copy of the Bible, the book he stole at the woman's house. Once there, after multiple attempts to ask, Montag forces the scared and reluctant Faber into helping him by methodically ripping pages from the Bible. Faber concedes and gives Montag a homemade earpiece communicator so that he can offer constant guidance.
At home, Mildred's friends, Mrs. Bowles and Mrs. Phelps, arrive to watch the "parlor walls". Not interested in this entertainment, Montag turns off the walls and tries to engage the women in meaningful conversation, only for them to reveal just how indifferent, ignorant, and callous they truly are. Enraged, Montag shows them a book of poetry. This confuses the women and alarms Faber, who is listening remotely. Mildred tries to dismiss Montag's actions as a tradition firemen act out once a year: they find an old book and read it as a way to make fun of how silly the past is. Montag proceeds to recite a poem,[note 2] causing Mrs. Phelps to cry. The two women leave.
Montag hides his books in the backyard before returning to the firehouse late at night. There, Montag hands Beatty a book to cover for the one he believes Beatty knows he stole the night before, which is tossed into the trash. Beatty reveals that, despite his disillusionment, he was once an enthusiastic reader. A fire alarm sounds and Beatty picks up the address from the dispatcher system. They drive in the fire truck to the unexpected destination: Montag's house.


### "Burning Bright"
Beatty orders Montag to destroy his house with a flamethrower, rather than the more powerful "salamander" that is usually used by the fire team, and tells him that his wife and her friends reported him. Montag watches as Mildred walks out of the house, too traumatized about losing her parlor wall 'family' to even acknowledge her husband's existence or the situation going on around her, and catches a taxi. Montag complies, destroying the home piece by piece, but Beatty discovers his earpiece and plans to hunt down Faber. Montag threatens Beatty with the flamethrower and, after Beatty taunts him, Montag burns Beatty alive. As Montag tries to escape the scene, the Mechanical Hound attacks him, managing to inject his leg with an anesthetic. He destroys the Hound with the flamethrower and limps away. While escaping, Montag concludes that Beatty wanted to die a long time ago, having goaded him and provided him with a weapon.
Montag runs towards Faber's house. En route, he crosses a road as a car attempts to run him over, but he manages to evade the vehicle, almost suffering the same fate as Clarisse and losing his knee. Faber urges him to make his way to the countryside and contact a group of exiled book-lovers who live there. Faber plans to leave on a bus heading to St. Louis, Missouri, where he and Montag can rendezvous later. Meanwhile, another Mechanical Hound is released to track down and kill Montag, with news helicopters following it to create a public spectacle. After wiping his scent from around the house in hopes of thwarting the Hound, Montag leaves. He escapes the manhunt by wading into a river and floating downstream, where he meets the book-lovers. They predicted Montag's arrival while watching the TV.
The drifters are all former intellectuals. They have each memorized books should the day arrive that society comes to an end, with the survivors learning to embrace the literature of the past. Wanting to contribute to the group, Montag finds that he partially memorized the Book of Ecclesiastes, discovering that the group has a special way of unlocking photographic memory. While discussing their learnings, Montag and the group watch helplessly as bombers fly overhead and annihilate the city with nuclear weapons: the war has begun and ended in the same night. While Faber would have left on the early bus, everyone else (possibly including Mildred) is killed. Injured and dirtied, Montag and the group manage to survive the shockwave.
When the war is over, the exiles return to the city to rebuild society.


## Characters
Guy Montag is the protagonist and a fireman who presents the dystopian world in which he lives first through the eyes of a worker loyal to it, then as a man in conflict about it, and eventually as someone resolved to be free of it. Throughout most of the book, Montag lacks knowledge and believes only what he hears. Clarisse McClellan inspires Montag's change, even though they do not know each other for very long.
Clarisse McClellan is a teenage girl one month short of her 17th birthday[note 3] who is Montag's neighbor.[28] She walks with Montag on his trips home from work. A modern critic has described her as an example of the Manic Pixie Dream Girl,[29] as Clarisse is an unusual sort of person compared to the others inhabiting the bookless, hedonistic society: outgoing, naturally cheerful, unorthodox, and intuitive. She is unpopular among peers and disliked by teachers for asking "why" instead of "how" and focusing on nature rather than on technology. A few days after her first meeting with Montag, she disappears without any explanation; Mildred tells Montag (and Captain Beatty confirms) that Clarisse was hit by a speeding car and that her family moved away following her death. It is implied that Beatty may have assassinated Clarisse. In the afterword of a later edition, Bradbury notes that the 1966 film adaptation changed the ending so that Clarisse (who, in the film, is now a 20-year-old schoolteacher who was fired for being unorthodox) was living with the exiles. Bradbury, far from being displeased by this, was so happy with the new ending that he wrote it into his later stage edition.
Mildred "Millie" Montag is Guy Montag's wife. She is addicted to sleeping pills, absorbed in the shallow dramas played on her "parlor walls" (large, flat-panel televisions), and indifferent to the oppressive society around her. She is described in the book as "thin as a praying mantis from dieting, her hair burnt by chemicals to a brittle straw, and her flesh like white bacon." Despite her husband's attempts to break her from the spell society has on her, Mildred continues to be shallow and indifferent. After Montag scares her friends away by reading Dover Beach, and finding herself unable to live with someone who has been hoarding books, Mildred betrays Montag by reporting him to the firemen and abandoning him, and presumably dies when the city is bombed.
Captain Beatty is Montag's boss and the book's main antagonist. Once an avid reader, he has come to hate books due to their unpleasant content and contradicting facts and opinions. After he forces Montag to burn his own house, Montag kills him with a flamethrower. In a scene written years later by Bradbury for the Fahrenheit 451 play, Beatty invites Montag to his house where he shows him walls of books left to molder on their shelves.
Stoneman and Black are Montag's coworkers at the firehouse. They do not have a large impact on the story and function only to show the reader the contrast between the firemen who obediently do as they are told and someone like Montag, who formerly took pride in his job but subsequently realizes how damaging it is to society. Black is later framed by Montag for possessing books.
Faber is a former English professor. He has spent years regretting that he did not defend books when he saw the moves to ban them. Montag turns to him for guidance, remembering him from a chance meeting in a park sometime earlier. Faber at first refuses to help Montag and later realizes Montag is only trying to learn about books, not destroy them. He secretly communicates with Montag through an electronic earpiece and helps Montag escape the city, then gets on a bus to St. Louis and escapes the city himself before it is bombed. Bradbury notes in his afterword that Faber is part of the name of a German manufacturer of pencils, Faber-Castell; it is also the name of a publishing company, Faber and Faber.
Mrs. Ann Bowles and Mrs. Clara Phelps are Mildred's friends and representative of the anti-intellectual, hedonistic mainstream society presented in the novel. During a social visit to Montag's house, they brag about ignoring the bad things in their lives and have a cavalier attitude towards the upcoming war, their husbands, their children, and politics. Mrs. Phelps' husband Pete was called in to fight in the upcoming war (and believes that he will be back in a week because of how quick the war will be) and thinks having children serves no purpose other than to ruin lives. Mrs. Bowles is a three-times-married single mother. Her first husband divorced her, her second died in a jet accident, and her third committed suicide by shooting himself in the head. She has two children who do not like or respect her due to her permissive, often negligent and abusive parenting; Mrs. Bowles brags that her kids beat her up, and she's glad she can hit back. When Montag reads Dover Beach to them, he strikes a chord in Mrs. Phelps, who starts crying over how hollow her life is. Mrs. Bowles chastises Montag for reading "silly awful hurting words".
Granger is the leader of a group of wandering intellectual exiles who memorize books in order to preserve their contents.


## Title
The title page of the book explains the title as follows: Fahrenheit 451—The temperature at which book paper catches fire and burns.... On inquiring about the temperature at which paper would catch fire, Bradbury had been told that 451 °F (233 °C) was the autoignition temperature of paper.[30][31] In various studies, scientists have placed the autoignition temperature at a range of temperatures between 424 and 475 °F (218 and 246 °C), depending on the type of paper.[32][33]


## Writing and development
Fahrenheit 451 developed out of a series of ideas Bradbury had visited in previously written stories. For many years, he tended to single out "The Pedestrian" in interviews and lectures as sort of a proto-Fahrenheit 451. In the preface of his 2006 anthology Match to Flame: The Fictional Paths to Fahrenheit 451 he states that this is an oversimplification.[34] The full genealogy of Fahrenheit 451 given in Match to Flame is involved. The following covers the most salient aspects.[35]
Between 1947 and 1948,[36] Bradbury wrote the short story "Bright Phoenix" (not published until the May 1963 issue of The Magazine of Fantasy & Science Fiction[37][38]) about a librarian who confronts a book-burning "Chief Censor" named Jonathan Barnes.
In late 1949,[39] Bradbury was stopped and questioned by a police officer while walking late one night.[40][41] When asked "What are you doing?", Bradbury wisecracked, "Putting one foot in front of another".[40][41] This incident inspired Bradbury to write the 1951 short story "The Pedestrian".[note 4][40][41]
In "The Pedestrian", Leonard Mead is harassed and detained by the city's only remotely operated police cruiser for taking nighttime walks, something that has become extremely rare in this future-based setting, as everybody else stays inside and watches television ("viewing screens"). Alone and without an alibi, Mead is taken to the "Psychiatric Center for Research on Regressive Tendencies" for his peculiar habit. Fahrenheit 451 echoed this theme of an authoritarian society distracted by broadcast media.[citation needed][42]
Bradbury expanded the book-burning premise of "Bright Phoenix"[43] and the totalitarian future of "The Pedestrian"[44] into "The Fireman", a novella published in the February 1951 issue of Galaxy Science Fiction.[45][46] "The Fireman" was written in the basement of UCLA's Powell Library on a typewriter that he rented for a fee of ten cents per half hour.[47] The first draft was 25,000 words long and was completed in nine days.[48]
Urged by a publisher at Ballantine Books to double the length of his story to make a novel, Bradbury returned to the same typing room and made the story 25,000 words longer, again taking nine days.[47] The title "Fahrenheit 451" came to him on January 22. The final manuscript was ready in mid-August, 1953.[49] The resulting novel, which some considered as a fix-up[50] (despite being an expanded rewrite of one single novella), was published by Ballantine in 1953.[51]


### Supplementary material
Bradbury has supplemented the novel with various front and back matter, including a 1979 coda,[52] a 1982 afterword,[53] a 1993 foreword, and several introductions.


## Publication history
The first U.S. printing was a paperback version from October 1953 by The Ballantine Publishing Group. Shortly after the paperback, a hardback version was released that included a special edition of 200 signed and numbered copies bound in asbestos.[54][55][56] These were technically collections because the novel was published with two short stories, "The Playground" and "And the Rock Cried Out", which have been omitted from later printings.[1][57] A few months later, the novel was serialized in the March, April, and May 1954 issues of nascent Playboy magazine.[10][58]


### Expurgation
Starting in January 1967, Fahrenheit 451 was subject to expurgation by its publisher, Ballantine Books, with the release of the "Bal-Hi Edition" aimed at high school students.[59][60] Among the changes made by the publisher were the censorship of the words "hell", "damn", and "abortion"; the modification of seventy-five passages; and the changing of two incidents.[60][61]
In the first incident, a drunk man is changed to a "sick man", while the second involves cleaning fluff out of a human navel, which instead becomes "cleaning ears" in the other.[60][62] For a while, both the censored and uncensored versions were available concurrently, but by 1973, Ballantine was publishing only the censored version.[62][63] That continued until 1979, when it came to Bradbury's attention:[62][63]
In 1979, one of Bradbury's friends showed him an expurgated copy of the book. Bradbury demanded that Ballantine Books withdraw that version and replace it with the original, and in 1980 the original version once again became available. In this reinstated work, in the Author's Afterword, Bradbury relates to the reader that it is not uncommon for a publisher to expurgate an author's work, but he asserts that he himself will not tolerate the practice of manuscript "mutilation".
The "Bal-Hi" editions are now referred to by the publisher as the "Revised Bal-Hi" editions.[64]


### Non-print publications
An audiobook version read by Bradbury himself was released in 1976 and received a Spoken Word Grammy nomination.[15] Another audiobook was released in 2005 narrated by Christopher Hurt.[65] The e-book version was released in December 2011.[66][67]


## Reception
In 1954, Galaxy Science Fiction reviewer Groff Conklin placed the novel "among the great works of the imagination written in English in the last decade or more."[68] The Chicago Sunday Tribune's August Derleth described the book as "a savage and shockingly prophetic view of one possible future way of life", calling it "compelling" and praising Bradbury for his "brilliant imagination".[69] Over half a century later, Sam Weller wrote, "upon its publication, Fahrenheit 451 was hailed as a visionary work of social commentary."[70] Today, Fahrenheit 451 is still viewed as an important cautionary tale about conformity and the evils of government censorship.[71]
When the novel was first published, there were those who did not find merit in the tale. Anthony Boucher and J. Francis McComas were less enthusiastic, faulting the book for being "simply padded, occasionally with startlingly ingenious gimmickry, ... often with coruscating cascades of verbal brilliance [but] too often merely with words."[72] Reviewing the book for Astounding Science Fiction, P. Schuyler Miller characterized the title piece as "one of Bradbury's bitter, almost hysterical diatribes," while praising its "emotional drive and compelling, nagging detail."[73] Similarly, The New York Times was unimpressed with the novel and further accused Bradbury of developing a "virulent hatred for many aspects of present-day culture, namely, such monstrosities as radio, TV, most movies, amateur and professional sports, automobiles, and other similar aberrations which he feels debase the bright simplicity of the thinking man's existence."[74]
Fahrenheit 451 was number seven on the list of "Top Check Outs OF ALL TIME" by the New York Public Library[75]


### Censorship/banning incidents
In the years since its publication, Fahrenheit 451 has occasionally been banned, censored, or redacted in some schools at the behest of parents or teaching staff either unaware of or indifferent to the inherent irony in such censorship. Notable incidents include:
In Apartheid South Africa, the book was burned along with thousands of banned publications between the 1950s and 1970s.[76]
In 1987, Fahrenheit 451 was given "third tier" status by the Bay County School Board in Panama City, Florida, under superintendent Leonard Hall's new three-tier classification system. Third tier was meant for books to be removed from the classroom for "a lot of vulgarity". After a resident class-action lawsuit, a media stir, and student protests, the school board abandoned their tier-based censorship system and approved all the currently used books.[77]
In 1992, Venado Middle School in Irvine, California, gave copies of Fahrenheit 451 to students with all "obscene" words blacked out.[78] Parents contacted the local media and succeeded in reinstalling the uncensored copies.[78]
In 2006, parents of a 10th-grade high school student in Montgomery County, Texas, demanded the book be banned from their daughter's English class reading list.[79] Their daughter was assigned the book during Banned Books Week, but stopped reading several pages in due to what she considered the offensive language and description of the burning of the Bible. In addition, the parents protested the violence, portrayal of Christians, and depictions of firemen in the novel.[79]


## Themes
Discussions about Fahrenheit 451 often center on its story foremost as a warning against state-based censorship. Indeed, when Bradbury wrote the novel during the McCarthy era, he was concerned about censorship in the United States. During a radio interview in 1956,[80][81] Bradbury said
I wrote this book at a time when I was worried about the way things were going in this country four years ago. Too many people were afraid of their shadows; there was a threat of book burning. Many of the books were being taken off the shelves at that time. And of course, things have changed a lot in four years. Things are going back in a very healthy direction. But at the time I wanted to do some sort of story where I could comment on what would happen to a country if we let ourselves go too far in this direction, where then all thinking stops, and the dragon swallows his tail, and we sort of vanish into a limbo and we destroy ourselves by this sort of action.
As time went by, Bradbury tended to dismiss censorship as a chief motivating factor for writing the story. Instead he usually claimed that the real messages of Fahrenheit 451 were about the dangers of an illiterate society infatuated with mass media and the threat of minority and special interest groups to books. In the late 1950s, Bradbury recounted
In writing the short novel Fahrenheit 451, I thought I was describing a world that might evolve in four or five decades. But only a few weeks ago, in Beverly Hills one night, a husband and wife passed me, walking their dog. I stood staring after them, absolutely stunned. The woman held in one hand a small cigarette-package-sized radio, its antenna quivering. From this sprang tiny copper wires which ended in a dainty cone plugged into her right ear. There she was, oblivious to man and dog, listening to far winds and whispers and soap-opera cries, sleep-walking, helped up and down curbs by a husband who might just as well not have been there. This was not fiction.[82]
This story echoes Mildred's "Seashell ear-thimbles" (i.e., a brand of in-ear headphones) that act as an emotional barrier between her and Montag. In a 2007 interview, Bradbury maintained that people misinterpret his book and that Fahrenheit 451 is really a statement on how mass media like television marginalizes the reading of literature.[8] Regarding minorities, he wrote in his 1979 Coda
'There is more than one way to burn a book. And the world is full of people running about with lit matches. Every minority, be it Baptist/Unitarian, Irish/Italian/Octogenarian/Zen Buddhist, Zionist/Seventh-day Adventist, Women's Lib/Republican, Mattachine/Four Square Gospel feels it has the will, the right, the duty to douse the kerosene, light the fuse. [...] Fire-Captain Beatty, in my novel Fahrenheit 451, described how the books were burned first by minorities, each ripping a page or a paragraph from this book, then that, until the day came when the books were empty and the minds shut and the libraries closed forever. [...] Only six weeks ago, I discovered that, over the years, some cubby-hole editors at Ballantine Books, fearful of contaminating the young, had, bit by bit, censored some seventy-five separate sections from the novel. Students, reading the novel, which, after all, deals with censorship and book-burning in the future, wrote to tell me of this exquisite irony. Judy-Lynn del Rey, one of the new Ballantine editors, is having the entire book reset and republished this summer with all the damns and hells back in place.[83]
Book-burning censorship, Bradbury would argue, was a side-effect of these two primary factors; this is consistent with Captain Beatty's speech to Montag about the history of the firemen. According to Bradbury, it is the people, not the state, who are the culprit in Fahrenheit 451.[8] Fahrenheit's censorship is not the result of an authoritarian program to retain power, but the result of a fragmented society seeking to accommodate its challenges by deploying the power of entertainment and technology. As Captain Beatty explains (p. 55)
...The bigger your market, Montag, the less you handle controversy, remember that! All the minor minorities with their navels to be kept clean."[...] "It didn't come from the Government down. There was no dictum, no declaration, no censorship, to start with, no! Technology, mass exploitation, and minority pressure carried the trick, thank God.
A variety of other themes in the novel besides censorship have been suggested. Two major themes are resistance to conformity and control of individuals via technology and mass media. Bradbury explores how the government is able to use mass media to influence society and suppress individualism through book burning. The characters Beatty and Faber point out that the American population is to blame. Due to their constant desire for a simplistic, positive image, books must be suppressed. Beatty blames the minority groups, who would take offense to published works that displayed them in an unfavorable light. Faber went further to state that, rather than the government banning books, the American population simply stopped reading on their own. He notes that the book burnings themselves became a form of entertainment for the general public.[84]
In a 1994 interview, Bradbury stated that Fahrenheit 451 was more relevant during this time than in any other, stating that, "it works even better because we have political correctness now. Political correctness is the real enemy these days. The black groups want to control our thinking and you can't say certain things. The homosexual groups don't want you to criticize them. It's thought control and freedom of speech control."[9]


## Predictions for the future
Fahrenheit 451 is set in an unspecified city and time, though it is written as if set in a distant future.[note 1][25] The earliest editions make clear that it takes place no earlier than the year 2022 due to a reference to an atomic war taking place during that year.[note 5][85]
Bradbury described himself as "a preventer of futures, not a predictor of them."[86] He did not believe that book burning was an inevitable part of the future; he wanted to warn against its development.[86] In a later interview, when asked if he believes that teaching Fahrenheit 451 in schools will prevent his totalitarian[2] vision of the future, Bradbury replied in the negative. Rather, he states that education must be at the kindergarten and first-grade level. If students are unable to read then, they will be unable to read Fahrenheit 451.[87]
As to technology, Sam Weller notes that Bradbury "predicted everything from flat-panel televisions to earbud headphones and twenty-four-hour banking machines."[88]


## Adaptations


### Television
Playhouse 90 broadcast "A Sound of Different Drummers" on CBS in 1957, written by Robert Alan Aurthur. The play combined plot ideas from Fahrenheit 451 and Nineteen Eighty-Four. Bradbury sued and eventually won on appeal.[89][90]


### Film
A film adaptation written and directed by François Truffaut and starring Oskar Werner and Julie Christie was released in 1966.[91]
A film adaptation directed by Ramin Bahrani and starring Michael B. Jordan, Michael Shannon, Sofia Boutella, and Lilly Singh was released in 2018 for HBO.[92][93]


### Theater
In the late 1970s Bradbury adapted his book into a play. At least part of it was performed at the Colony Theatre in Los Angeles in 1979, but it was not in print until 1986 and the official world premiere was only in November 1988 by the Fort Wayne, Indiana Civic Theatre. The stage adaptation diverges considerably from the book and seems influenced by Truffaut's movie. For example, fire chief Beatty's character is fleshed out and is the wordiest role in the play. As in the movie, Clarisse does not simply disappear but in the finale meets up with Montag as a book character (she as Robert Louis Stevenson, he as Edgar Allan Poe).[94]
The UK premiere of Bradbury's stage adaptation was not until 2003 in Nottingham,[94] while it took until 2006 before the Godlight Theatre Company produced and performed its New York City premiere at 59E59 Theaters.[95] After the completion of the New York run, the production then transferred to the Edinburgh Festival where it was a 2006 Edinburgh Festival Pick of the Fringe.[96]
The Off-Broadway theatre The American Place Theatre presented a one man show adaptation of Fahrenheit 451 as a part of their 2008–2009 Literature to Life season.[97]
Bradbury's Pandemonium Theatre Company[98] staged a production at the Fremont Centre Theatre in South Pasadena from April[99] through December 2008,[100][101][102] which was led by resident director Alan Neal Hubbs, produced by Bradbury and Racquel Lehrman, and starred David Polcyn (alternated with David Mauer and Lee Holmes) as Montag,[103] Mageina Tovah alternating with Tanya Mounsey as Montag's wife, Jessica D. Stone as Clarisse, and Michael Prichard as Captain Beatty.[104] The play was extended multiple times during its run for its reported popularity with audiences.[100]
Fahrenheit 451 inspired the Birmingham Repertory Theatre production Time Has Fallen Asleep in the Afternoon Sunshine, which was performed at the Birmingham Central Library in April 2012.[105]


### Radio
In 1982, Gregory Evans' radio dramatization of the novel was broadcast on BBC Radio 4 starring Michael Pennington as Montag.[106][107][108] It was broadcast eight more times on BBC Radio 4 Extra, twice each in 2010, 2012, 2013, and 2015.[109]
BBC Radio's second dramatization, by David Calcutt, was broadcast on BBC Radio 4 in 2003, starring Stephen Tomlin in the same role.[110]


### Music
In 1984 the new wave band Scortilla released the song Fahrenheit 451 inspired by the book by R. Bradbury and the film by F. Truffaut.
In 2025, one composition on the instrumental concept album The Ray Bradbury Chronicles[111] was based on the book, with three sections (City, Escape, Exile) inspired by the key stages of the novel's plotline.


### Computer games
In 1984, the novel was adapted into a computer text adventure game of the same name by the software company Trillium,[112] serving as a sequel to the events of the novel, and co-written by Len Neufeld and Bradbury himself.


### Comics
In June 2009, a graphic novel edition of the book was published. Entitled Ray Bradbury's Fahrenheit 451: The Authorized Adaptation,[113] the paperback graphic adaptation was illustrated by Tim Hamilton.[114][115] The introduction in the novel is written by Bradbury himself.[116]


## Cultural references
Michael Moore's 2004 documentary Fahrenheit 9/11 refers to Bradbury's novel and the September 11 attacks, emphasized by the film's tagline "The temperature where freedom burns". The film takes a critical look at the presidency of George W. Bush, the War on Terror, and its coverage in the news media, and became the highest grossing documentary of all time.[117] Bradbury was upset by what he considered the appropriation of his title, and wanted the film renamed. He really didn't want to be associated in any way.[118][119] Moore filmed a subsequent documentary about the 2016 election of Donald Trump called Fahrenheit 11/9 in 2018, but compared to the earlier documentary, there was a complete shift in interest by the general audience.[120]
In 2015, the Internet Engineering Steering Group approved the publication of An HTTP Status Code to Report Legal Obstacles, now RFC 7725, which specifies that websites forced to block resources for legal reasons should return a status code of 451 when users request those resources.[121][122][123][124]
Guy Montag (as Gui Montag) is used in the 1998 real-time strategy game StarCraft as a terran firebat hero.[125]
The numbers "451", and sometimes "0451", are often included as the first security code a player encounters in immersive sim video games as a reference to the System Shock series of games which first included the code as their own reference to Bradbury's novel.[126]


## See also
Brave New World
Burning of books and burying of scholars


## Notes
^ a b During Captain Beatty's recounting of the history of the firemen to Montag, he says, "Out of the nursery into the college and back to the nursery; where there's your intellectual pattern for the past five centuries or more." The text is ambiguous regarding which century he is claiming began this pattern. One interpretation is that he means the 20th century, which would place the novel in at least the 24th century. "The Fireman" novella, which was expanded to become Fahrenheit 451, is set in October 2052.
^ Specifically Dover Beach.
^ Clarisse tells Montag she is "seventeen and crazy", later admitting that she will actually be seventeen "next month".
^ "The Pedestrian" would go on to be published in The Reporter magazine on August 7, 1951, that is, after the publication in February 1951 of its inspired work "The Fireman".
^ In early editions of the book, Montag says, "We've started and won two atomic wars since 1960", in the first pages of The Sieve and the Sand. This sets a lower bound on the time setting. In later decades, some editions have changed this year to 1990 or 2022.


## References
Jerrin, Neil Beeto, and G. Bhuvaneswari. "Distortion of 'Self-Image': Effects of Mental Delirium in Fahrenheit 451 by Ray Bradbury." Theory & Practice in Language Studies, vol. 12, no. 8, Aug. 2022, pp. 1634–40. EBSCOhost, Distortion of ‘Self-Image’: Effects of Mental Delirium in Fahrenheit 451 by Ray Bradbury
^ a b Crider, Bill (Fall 1980). Laughlin, Charlotte; Lee, Billy C. (eds.). "Ray Bradbury's FAHRENHEIT 451". Paperback Quarterly. III (3): 22. ISBN 978-1-4344-0633-0. The first paperback edition featured illustrations by Joe Mugnaini and contained two stories in addition to the title tale: 'The Playground' and 'And The Rock Cried Out'.
^ a b Gerall, Alina; Hobby, Blake (2010). "Fahrenheit 451". In Bloom, Harold; Hobby, Blake (eds.). Civil Disobedience. Infobase Publishing. p. 148. ISBN 978-1-60413-439-1. While Fahrenheit 451 begins as a dystopic novel about a totalitarian government that bans reading, the novel concludes with Montag relishing the book he has put to memory.
^ "Books Published Today". The New York Times: 19. October 19, 1953.
^ Reid, Robin Anne (2000). Ray Bradbury: A Critical Companion. Critical Companions to Popular Contemporary Writers. Westport, CT: Greenwood Press. p. 53. ISBN 0-313-30901-9. Fahrenheit 451 is considered one of Bradbury's best works.
^ Seed, David (September 12, 2005). A Companion to Science Fiction. Blackwell Companions to Literature and Culture. Vol. 34. Malden, MA: Blackwell Publications. pp. 491–98. ISBN 978-1-4051-1218-5.
^ a b Ray Bradbury's Fahrenheit 451 audio guide. The Big Read. Archived from the original on May 24, 2017. Retrieved August 18, 2013. Well, we should learn from history about the destruction of books. When I was fifteen years old, Hitler burned books in the streets of Berlin. And it terrified me because I was a librarian and he was touching my life: all those great plays, all that great poetry, all those wonderful essays, all those great philosophers. So, it became very personal, didn't it? Then I found out about Russia burning the books behind the scenes. But they did it in such a way that people didn't know about it. They killed the authors behind the scenes. They burned the authors instead of the books. So I learned then how dangerously [sic] it all was.
^ Ray Bradbury (December 4, 1956). "Ticket to the Moon (tribute to SciFi)". Biography in Sound. Narrated by Norman Rose. NBC Radio News. 27:10–27:30. Archived from the original (mp3) on February 9, 2021. Retrieved February 2, 2017. I wrote this book at a time when I was worried about the way things were going in this country four years ago. Too many people were afraid of their shadows; there was a threat of book burning. Many of the books were being taken off the shelves at that time.
^ a b c Johnston, Amy E. Boyle (May 30, 2007). "Ray Bradbury: Fahrenheit 451 Misinterpreted". LA Weekly website. Archived from the original on July 9, 2019. Retrieved July 9, 2019. Bradbury still has a lot to say, especially about how people do not understand his most famous literary work, Fahrenheit 451, published in 1953 ... Bradbury, a man living in the creative and industrial center of reality TV and one-hour dramas, says it is, in fact, a story about how television destroys interest in reading literature.
^ a b Bradbury Talk Likely to Feature the Unexpected Archived July 10, 2019, at the Wayback Machine, Dayton Daily News, 1 October 1994, City Edition, Lifestyle/Weekendlife Section, p. 1C.
^ a b Aggelis, Steven L., ed. (2004). Conversations with Ray Bradbury. Jackson, MS: University Press of Mississippi. p. xxix. ISBN 1-57806-640-9. ...[in 1954 Bradbury received] two other awards—National Institute of Arts and Letters Award in Literature and Commonwealth Club of California Literature Gold Medal Award—for Fahrenheit 451, which is published in three installments in Playboy.
^ Davis, Scott A. "The California Book Awards Winners 1931-2012" (PDF). Commonwealth Club of California. Archived (PDF) from the original on February 28, 2021. Retrieved March 5, 2014.
^ Nolan, William F. (May 1963). "BRADBURY: Prose Poet In The Age Of Space". The Magazine of Fantasy and Science Fiction. 24 (5). Mercury: 20. Then there was the afternoon at Huston's Irish manor when a telegram arrived to inform Bradbury that his first novel, Fahrenheit 451, a bitterly-satirical story of the book-burning future, had been awarded a grant of $1,000 from the National Institute of Arts and Letters.
^ "Libertarian Futurist Society: Prometheus Awards, A Short History". Archived from the original on April 19, 2021. Retrieved August 9, 2013.
^ "1954 Retro Hugo Awards". July 26, 2007. Archived from the original on July 30, 2013. Retrieved August 9, 2013.
^ a b "19th Annual Grammy Awards Final Nominations". Billboard. Vol. 89, no. 3. Nielsen Business Media Inc. January 22, 1976. p. 110. ISSN 0006-2510.
^ Genzlinger, Neil (March 25, 2006). "Godlight Theater's 'Fahrenheit 451' Offers Hot Ideas for the Information Age". The New York Times. Archived from the original on November 17, 2021. Retrieved August 10, 2013.
^ Kelley, Ken (May 1996). "Playboy Interview: Ray Bradbury". Playboy. raybradbury.com. Archived from the original on August 17, 2019. Retrieved August 24, 2013. In the movie business the Hollywood Ten were sent to prison for refusing to testify before the House Un-American Activities Committee, and in the Screen Writers Guild Bradbury was one of the lonely voices opposing the loyalty oath imposed on its members.
^ Beley, Gene (2007). Ray Bradbury uncensored!. Lincoln, NE: iUniverse. ISBN 978-0-595-37364-2. 'I was angry at Senator Joseph McCarthy and the people before him, like Parnell Thomas and the House Un-American Activities Committee and Bobby Kennedy, who was part of that whole bunch', Bradbury told Judith Green, San Joe Mercury News theatre critic, in the October 30, 1993, edition. 'I was angry about the blacklisting and the Hollywood 10. I was a $100 a week screenwriter, but I wasn't scared—I was angry.'
^ Beley, Gene (2006). Ray Bradbury Uncensored!: The Unauthorized Biography. iUniverse. pp. 130–40. ISBN 9780595373642.
^ Eller, Jonathan R.; Touponce, William F. (2004). Ray Bradbury: The Life of Fiction. Kent State University Press. pp. 164–65. ISBN 9780873387798.
^ Reid, Robin Anne (2000). Ray Bradbury: A Critical Companion. Critical Companions to Popular Contemporary Writers. Westport, CT: Greenwood Press. p. 59. ISBN 0-313-30901-9.
^ Orlean, Susan (2018). The Library Book. New York: Simon & Schuster. p. 103. ISBN 978-1-4767-4018-8.
^ Cusatis, John (2010). Research Guide to American Literature: Postwar Literature 1945–1970. Facts on File Library of American Literature. Vol. 6 (New ed.). New York, NY: Infobase Publishing. ISBN 978-1-4381-3405-5. He 'wept' when he learned at the age of nine that the ancient library of Alexandria had been burned.
^ Westfahl, Gary (2005). The Greenwood Encyclopedia of Science Fiction and Fantasy: Themes, Works, and Wonders. Vol. 3. Greenwood Publishing Group. p. 1029. ISBN 9780313329531. Archived from the original on November 17, 2021. Retrieved November 11, 2020. Inspired by images of book burning by the Nazis and written at the height of Army-McCarthy 'Red Scare' hearings in America, Fahrenheit 451...
^ a b Society for the Study of Midwestern Literature (2001). Greasley, Philip A. (ed.). Dictionary of Midwestern Literature. Vol. 1, The Authors. Indiana University Press. p. 78. ISBN 9780253336095. Archived from the original on September 30, 2021. Retrieved March 5, 2014. Fahrenheit 451 is not set in any specific locale...
^ De Koster, Katie, ed. (2000). Readings on Fahrenheit 451. Literary Companion Series. San Diego, CA: Greenhaven Press. p. 35. ISBN 1-56510-857-4. Montag does not realize at first that she is gone, or that he misses her; he simply feels that something is the matter.
^ De Koster, Katie, ed. (2000). Readings on Fahrenheit 451. Literary Companion Series. San Diego, CA: Greenhaven Press. p. 32. ISBN 1-56510-857-4. The Mechanical Hound is an eight-legged glass and metal contraption that serves as a surveillance tool and programmable killing machine for the firemen, to track down suspected book hoarders and readers.
^ De Koster, Katie, ed. (2000). Readings on Fahrenheit 451. Literary Companion Series. San Diego, CA: Greenhaven Press. p. 31. ISBN 1-56510-857-4. Montag's new neighbor, the sixteen-year-old Clarisse, appears in only a few scenes at the beginning of the novel.
^ Maher, Jimmy (September 23, 2013). "Fahrenheit 451: The Book". The Digital Antiquarian. Archived from the original on April 24, 2019. Retrieved July 10, 2014.
^ Rogers, John (June 6, 2012). "Author of 'Fahrenheit 451', Ray Bradbury, Dies at 91". U.S. News & World Report. Associated Press. Archived from the original on August 17, 2013. Retrieved August 3, 2013. (451 degrees Fahrenheit, Bradbury had been told, was the temperature at which texts went up in flames)
^ Gaiman, Neil (May 31, 2016). "Ray Bradbury, Fahrenheit 451, and what science fiction is and does". The View from the Cheap Seats. HarperCollins. p. 180. ISBN 978-0-06-226226-4. He called the Los Angeles fire department and asked them at what temperature paper burned. Fahrenheit 451, somebody told him. He had his title. It didn't matter if it was true or not.
^ Cafe, Tony. "PHYSICAL CONSTANTS FOR INVESTIGATORS". tcforensic.com.au. TC Forensic P/L. Archived from the original on January 27, 2015. Retrieved February 11, 2015.
^ Forest Products Laboratory (1964). "Ignition and charring temperatures of wood" (PDF). Forest Service U. S. Department of Agriculture. Archived (PDF) from the original on February 18, 2020. Retrieved February 5, 2018.
^ Bradbury, Ray (2006). "Preface". In Albright, Donn; Eller, Jon (eds.). Match to Flame: The Fictional Paths to Fahrenheit 451 (1st ed.). Colorado Springs, CO: Gauntlet Publications. p. 9. ISBN 1-887368-86-8. For many years I've told people that Fahrenheit 451 was the result of my story 'The Pedestrian' continuing itself in my life. It turns out that this is a misunderstanding of my own past. Long before 'The Pedestrian' I did all the stories that you'll find in this book and forgot about them.
^ Bradbury, Ray (2007). Match to Flame: The Fictional Paths to Fahrenheit 451. USA: Gauntlet Pr. ISBN 978-1887368865.
^ "FAHRENHEIT 451". The Magazine of Fantasy and Science Fiction. 24 (5). Mercury: 23. May 1963. Ray Bradbury calls this story, the first of the tandem, 'a curiosity. I wrote it [he says] back in 1947–48 and it remained in my files over the years, going out only a few times to quality markets like Harper's Bazaar or The Atlantic Monthly, where it was dismissed. It lay in my files and collected about it many ideas. These ideas grew large and became ...
^ Bradbury, Ray (May 1963). "Bright Phoenix". The Magazine of Fantasy and Science Fiction. 24 (5). Mercury: 23–29.
^ "About the Book: Fahrenheit 451". The Big Read. National Endowment for the Arts. Archived from the original on May 11, 2012.
^ Eller, Jon (2006). "Writing by Degrees: The Family Tree of Fahrenheit 451". In Albright, Donn; Eller, Jon (eds.). Match to Flame: The Fictional Paths to Fahrenheit 451 (1st ed.). Colorado Springs, CO: Gauntlet Publications. p. 68. ISBN 1-887368-86-8. The specific incident that sparked 'The Pedestrian' involved a similar late-night walk with a friend along Wilshire Boulevard near Western Avenue sometime in late 1949.
^ a b c Ray Bradbury's Fahrenheit 451 audio guide. The Big Read. When I came out of a restaurant when I was thirty years old, and I went walking along Wilshire Boulevard with a friend, and a police car pulled up and the policeman got up and came up to us and said, 'What are you doing?'. I said, 'Putting one foot in front of the other' and that was the wrong answer but he kept saying, you know, 'Look in this direction and that direction: there are no pedestrians' but that give me the idea for 'The Pedestrian' and 'The Pedestrian' turned into Montag! So the police officer is responsible for the writing of Fahrenheit 451.
^ a b c De Koster, Katie, ed. (2000). Readings on Fahrenheit 451. Literary Companion Series. San Diego, CA: Greenhaven Press. p. 26. ISBN 1-56510-857-4.
^ Alam, Mohammad Farogh (November 2024). "Censorship and the Suppression of Knowledge in Ray Bradbury's Fahrenheit 451" (PDF). The Academic: International Journal of Multidisciplinary Research. 2 (11).
^ De Koster, Katie, ed. (2000). Readings on Fahrenheit 451. Literary Companion Series. San Diego, CA: Greenhaven Press. p. 158. ISBN 1-56510-857-4. He writes 'The Phoenix [sic],' which he will later develop into the short story 'The Fireman,' which will eventually become Fahrenheit 451.
^ Eller, Jon (2006). "Writing by Degrees: The Family Tree of Fahrenheit 451". In Albright, Donn; Eller, Jon (eds.). Match to Flame: The Fictional Paths to Fahrenheit 451 (1st ed.). Colorado Springs, CO: Gauntlet Publications. p. 68. ISBN 1-887368-86-8. As Bradbury has often noted, 'The Pedestrian' marks the true flashpoint that exploded into 'The Fireman' and Fahrenheit 451.
^ Bradbury, Ray (February 1951). "The Fireman". Galaxy Science Fiction. 5. 15 (1): 4–61.
^ De Koster, Katie, ed. (2000). Readings on Fahrenheit 451. Literary Companion Series. San Diego, CA: Greenhaven Press. p. 164. ISBN 1-56510-857-4. The short story which Bradbury later expanded into the novel Fahrenheit 451, was originally published in Galaxy Science Fiction, vol. 1, no. 5 (February 1951), under the title 'The Fireman.'
^ a b Eller, Jon (2006). "Writing by Degrees: The Family Tree of Fahrenheit 451". In Albright, Donn; Eller, Jon (eds.). Match to Flame: The Fictional Paths to Fahrenheit 451 (1st ed.). Colorado Springs, CO: Gauntlet Publications. p. 57. ISBN 1-887368-86-8. In 1950 Ray Bradbury composed his 25,000-word novella 'The Fireman' in just this way, and three years later he returned to the same subterranean typing room for another nine-day stint to expand this cautionary tale into the 50,000-word novel Fahrenheit 451.
^ Bradbury, Ray (2003). Fahrenheit 451 (50th anniversary ed.). New York, NY: Ballantine Books. pp. 167–68. ISBN 0-345-34296-8.
^ Weller, Sam. Bradbury Chronicles.
^ Liptak, Andrew (August 5, 2013). "A.E. van Vogt and the Fix-Up Novel". Kirkus Reviews. Archived from the original on January 12, 2018. Retrieved January 12, 2018.
^ Baxter, John (2005). A Pound of Paper: Confessions of a Book Addict. Macmillan. p. 393. ISBN 9781466839892. When it published the first edition in 1953, Ballantine also produced 200 signed and numbered copies bound in Johns-Manville Quintera, a form of asbestos.
^ Brier, Evan (2011). A Novel Marketplace: Mass Culture, the Book Trade, and Postwar American Fiction. University of Pennsylvania Press. p. 65. ISBN 9780812201444. Archived from the original on November 17, 2021. Retrieved November 11, 2020. Bradbury closes his 1979 'Coda' to Fahrenheit 451, one of numerous comments on the novel he has published since 1953, ...
^ Reid, Robin Anne (2000). Ray Bradbury: A Critical Companion. Critical Companions to Popular Contemporary Writers. Westport, CT: Greenwood Press. p. 53. ISBN 0-313-30901-9. Archived from the original on November 17, 2021. Retrieved November 11, 2020. In a 1982 afterword...
^ Tuck, Donald H. (March 1974). The Encyclopedia of Science Fiction and Fantasy. Vol. 1: Who's Who, A–L. Chicago, Illinois: Advent. p. 62. ISBN 0-911682-20-1. LCCN 73091828. Special edition bound in asbestos—200 copies ca. 1954, $4.00 [probably Ballantine text]
^ "Fahrenheit 451". Ray Bradbury Online. spaceagecity.com. Archived from the original on May 16, 2017. Retrieved September 4, 2013. 200 copies were signed and numbered and bound in 'Johns-Manville Quinterra,' an asbestos material.
^ De Koster, Katie, ed. (2000). Readings on Fahrenheit 451. Literary Companion Series. San Diego, CA: Greenhaven Press. p. 164. ISBN 1-56510-857-4. A special limited-edition version of the book with an asbestos cover was printed in 1953.
^ Weller, Sam (2006). The Bradbury Chronicles: The Life of Ray Bradbury. HarperCollins. p. 208. ISBN 978-0-06-054584-0. Archived from the original on November 17, 2021. Retrieved November 11, 2020. To fulfill his agreement with Doubleday that the book be a collection rather than a novel, the first edition of Fahrenheit 451 included two additional short stories—'The Playground' and 'And the Rock Cried Out.' (The original plan was to include eight stories plus Fahrenheit 451, but Ray didn't have time to revise all the tales.) 'The Playground' and 'And the Rock Cried Out' were removed in much later printings; in the meantime, Ray had met his contractual obligation with the first edition. Fahrenheit 451 was a short novel, but it was also a part of a collection.
^ De Koster, Katie, ed. (2000). Readings on Fahrenheit 451. Literary Companion Series. San Diego, CA: Greenhaven Press. p. 159. ISBN 1-56510-857-4. A serialized version of Fahrenheit 451 appears in the March, April, and May 1954 issues of Playboy magazine.
^ Crider, Bill (Fall 1980). Lee, Billy C.; Laughlin, Charlotte (eds.). "Reprints/Reprints: Ray Bradbury's FAHRENHEIT 451". Paperback Quarterly. III (3): 25. ISBN 9781434406330. Archived from the original on May 4, 2021. Retrieved November 11, 2020. The censorship began with a special 'Bal-Hi' edition in 1967, an edition designed for high school students...
^ a b c Karolides, Nicholas J.; Bald, Margaret; Sova, Dawn B. (2011). 120 Banned Books: Censorship Histories of World Literature (Second ed.). Checkmark Books. p. 488. ISBN 978-0-8160-8232-2. In 1967, Ballantine Books published a special edition of the novel to be sold in high schools. Over 75 passages were modified to eliminate such words as hell, damn, and abortion, and two incidents were eliminated. The original first incident described a drunk man who was changed to a sick man in the expurgated edition. In the second incident, reference is made to cleaning fluff out of the human navel, but the expurgated edition changed the reference to cleaning ears.
^ Burress, Lee (1989). Battle of the Books: Literary Censorship in the Public Schools, 1950–1985. Scarecrow Press. p. 104. ISBN 0-8108-2151-6.
^ a b c Greene, Bill (February 2007). "The mutilation and rebirth of a classic: Fahrenheit 451". Compass: New Directions at Falvey. III (3). Villanova University. Archived from the original on February 11, 2021. Retrieved August 3, 2013.
^ a b Karolides, Nicholas J.; Bald, Margaret; Sova, Dawn B. (2011). 120 Banned Books: Censorship Histories of World Literature (Second ed.). Checkmark Books. p. 488. ISBN 978-0-8160-8232-2. After six years of simultaneous editions, the publisher ceased publication of the adult version, leaving only the expurgated version for sale from 1973 through 1979, during which neither Bradbury nor anyone else suspected the truth.
^ Crider, Bill (Fall 1980). Lee, Billy C.; Laughlin, Charlotte (eds.). "Reprints/Reprints: Ray Bradbury's FAHRENHEIT 451". Paperback Quarterly. III (3): 25. ISBN 9781434406330. Archived from the original on November 17, 2021. Retrieved November 11, 2020. There is no mention anywhere on the Bal-Hi edition that it has been abridged, but printing histories in later Ballantine editions refer to the 'Revised Bal-Hi Editions'.
^ Bradbury, Ray (2005). Fahrenheit 451. Read by Christopher Hurt (Unabridged ed.). Ashland, OR: Blackstone Audiobooks. ISBN 0-7861-7627-X.
^ "Fahrenheit 451 becomes e-book despite author's feelings". BBC News. November 30, 2011. Archived from the original on January 6, 2013. Retrieved August 24, 2013.
^ Flood, Alison (November 30, 2011). "Fahrenheit 451 ebook published as Ray Bradbury gives in to digital era". The Guardian. Archived from the original on October 2, 2013. Retrieved October 6, 2013.
^ Conklin, Groff (February 1954). "Galaxy's 5 Star Shelf". Galaxy Science Fiction: 108.
^ Derleth, August (October 25, 1953). "Vivid Prophecy of Book Burning". Chicago Sunday Tribune.
^ Weller, Sam (2010). Listen to the Echoes: The Ray Bradbury Interviews. Brooklyn, NY: Melville House. p. 124.
^ McNamee, Gregory (September 15, 2010). "Appreciations: Fahrenheit 451". Kirkus Reviews. 78 (18): 882.
^ "Recommended Reading", F&SF, December 1953, p. 105.
^ "The Reference Library", Astounding Science Fiction, April 1954, pp. 145–46
^ "Nothing but TV". The New York Times. November 14, 1953.
^ "These Are the NYPL's Top Check Outs OF ALL TIME". January 13, 2020. Archived from the original on January 13, 2020. Retrieved January 13, 2020.
^ "How the apartheid regime burnt books -- in their tens of thousands". October 24, 2018.
^ Karolides, Nicholas J.; Bald, Margaret; Sova, Dawn B. (2011). 120 Banned Books: Censorship Histories of World Literature (Second ed.). Checkmark Books. pp. 501–02. ISBN 978-0-8160-8232-2.
^ a b Karolides, Nicholas J.; Bald, Margaret; Sova, Dawn B. (2011). 120 Banned Books: Censorship Histories of World Literature (Second ed.). Checkmark Books. p. 489. ISBN 978-0-8160-8232-2. In 1992, students of Venado Middle School in Irvine, California, were issued copies of the novel with numerous words blacked out. School officials had ordered teachers to use black markers to obliterate all of the 'hells', 'damns', and other words deemed 'obscene' in the books before giving them to students as required reading. Parents complained to the school and contacted local newspapers, who sent reporters to write stories about the irony of a book that condemns bookburning and censorship being expurgated. Faced with such an outcry, school officials announced that the censored copies would no longer be used.
^ a b Wrigley, Deborah (October 3, 2006). "Parent files complaint about book assigned as student reading". ABC News. Archived from the original on September 27, 2013. Retrieved March 2, 2013.
^ Ray Bradbury (December 4, 1956). "Ticket to the Moon (tribute to SciFi)" (mp3). Biography in Sound. Narrated by Norman Rose. NBC Radio News. 27:10–27:57. Archived from the original on February 9, 2021. Retrieved February 2, 2017.
^ "The Definitive Biography in Sound Radio Log". Archived from the original on March 21, 2021. Retrieved March 1, 2013.
^ Quoted by Kingsley Amis in New Maps of Hell: A Survey of Science Fiction (1960). Bradbury directly foretells this incident early in the work: "And in her ears the little Seashells, the thimble radios tamped tight, and an electronic ocean of sound, of music and talk and music and talking coming in." p.12
^ Bradbury, Ray (2003). Fahrenheit 451 (50th anniversary ed.). New York, NY: Ballantine Books. pp. 175–79. ISBN 0-345-34296-8.
^ Reid, Robin Anne (2000). Ray Bradbury: A Critical Companion. Critical Companions to Popular Contemporary Writers. Westport, CT: Greenwood Press. pp. 59–60. ISBN 0-313-30901-9.
^ Reid, Robin Anne (2000). Ray Bradbury: A Critical Companion. Critical Companions to Popular Contemporary Writers. Westport, CT: Greenwood Press. p. 53. ISBN 0-313-30901-9. Fahrenheit 451 is set in an unnamed city in the United States, possibly in the Midwest, in some undated future.
^ a b Aggelis, Steven L., ed. (2004). Conversations with Ray Bradbury. Interview by Shel Dorf. Jackson, MS: University Press of Mississippi. p. 99. ISBN 1-57806-640-9. I am a preventor of futures, not a predictor of them. I wrote Fahrenheit 451 to prevent book-burnings, not to induce that future into happening, or even to say that it was inevitable.
^ Aggelis, Steven L., ed. (2004). Conversations with Ray Bradbury. Jackson, MS: University Press of Mississippi. p. 189. ISBN 1-57806-640-9.
^ Weller, Sam (2010). Listen to the Echoes: The Ray Bradbury Interviews. Brooklyn, NY: Melville House. p. 263. ISBN 978-1935554035.
^ Nolan, William F. (May 1963). "Bradbury: Prose Poet in the Age of Space". The Magazine of Fantasy and Science Fiction: 7–21.
^ Bowie, Stephen (August 17, 2010). "The Sound of a Single Drummer". The Classic TV History Blog. wordpress.com. Archived from the original on August 31, 2013. Retrieved August 29, 2013.
^ Frey, James N. (2010). How to Write a Damn Good Thriller: A Step-by-Step Guide for Novelists and Screenwriters (1st ed.). Macmillan. p. 255. ISBN 978-0-312-57507-6. Archived from the original on November 17, 2021. Retrieved March 5, 2014. FAHRENHEIT 451* (1966); written by François Truffaut from the novel by Ray Bradbury; starring Oskar Werner and Julie Christie; directed by François Truffaut.
^ Hipes, Patrick (April 19, 2017). "HBO's 'Fahrenheit 451' Movie: Michael B. Jordan & Michael Shannon To Star". Deadline. Archived from the original on January 21, 2020. Retrieved May 8, 2017.
^ Ford, Rebecca (June 6, 2017). "'Mummy' Star Sofia Boutella Joins Michael B. Jordan in 'Fahrenheit 451'". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on November 12, 2020. Retrieved April 16, 2020.
^ a b Fahrenheit 451 (play) Archived April 20, 2017, at the Wayback Machine, BradburyMedia; accessed September 17, 2016.
^ Genzlinger, Neil (March 25, 2006). "Godlight Theater's 'Fahrenheit 451' Offers Hot Ideas for the Information Age". The New York Times. Archived from the original on November 17, 2021. Retrieved March 2, 2013.
^ "The Edinburgh festival 2006 – Reviews – Theatre 'F' – 8 out of 156". Edinburghguide.com. Archived from the original on September 23, 2012. Retrieved June 15, 2013.
^ "Literature to Life – Citizenship & Censorship: Raise Your Civic Voice in 2008–09". The American Place Theatre. Archived from the original on November 10, 2009.
^ Callow, Jr., Christos; Bould, Mark; Butler, Andrew M.; Vint, Sheryl (June 13, 2024). "Science Fiction Theatre". The New Routledge Companion to Science Fiction (Routledge Literature Companions) 2nd Edition. United Kingdom: Routledge. p. 157. ISBN 978-0367690533.
^ Sokoloff, Philip (12 March 2008). "Ray Bradbury's 'Fahrenehit 451' Opens at Fremont Centre Theatre on April 19". OnStage 411. Retrieved 14 May 2025.
^ a b "The legendary Ray Bradbury - Ray Bradbury's 'Fahrenheit 451' Returns To Fremont Centre Theatre Starting October 18". The Monrovia Weekly. 11 September 2008. Retrieved 14 May 2025 – via NewsBank.
^ "LA Stage Times: Returning 10/17 By Demand! Ray Bradbury's FAHRENHEIT 451 - Fremont Centre Theatre, So.,Pasadena". Los Angeles Times: 61. 11 October 2008.
^ "Ray Bradbury's FAHRENHEIT 451 Directed by ALAN NEAL HUBBS - EXTENDED by Demand through 12/20!" Los Angeles Times: 97. 13 November 2008.
^ Stoudt, Charlotte; Nichols, David C. (4 July 2008). " 'Fahrenheit 451' burns in flashes". Los Angeles Times. Retrieved 14 May 2025.
^ "Opened October 2008: Ray Bradbury's Fahrenheit 451. Written by Ray Bradbury, directed by Alan Neal Hubbs. Presented by Ray Bradbury's Pandemonium Theatre Company". Fremonet Centre Theatre. Retrieved 26 April 2025.
^ Edvardsen, Mette. "Time Has Fallen Asleep In The Afternoon Sunshine Presented at Birmingham Central Library". Archived from the original on May 31, 2012. Retrieved March 22, 2013.
^ Nichols, Phil (October 17, 2007). "A sympathy with sounds: Ray Bradbury and BBC Radio, 1951–1970". The Radio Journal: International Studies in Broadcast and Audio Media. 4 (1, 2, 3): 111–123. doi:10.1386/rajo.4.1,2,3.111_1 (inactive July 1, 2025). hdl:2436/622705. ISSN 1476-4504. Archived from the original on November 16, 2021. Retrieved November 16, 2021 – via ResearchGate.{{cite journal}}: CS1 maint: DOI inactive as of July 2025 (link)
^ Nigel Deacon. "Ray Bradbury Radio Plays & Readings". Diversity Website. Archived from the original on June 13, 2012. Retrieved June 7, 2012.
^ Bradbury, Ray (November 13, 1982). Ray Bradbury: Fahrenheit 451 (Radio broadcast). BBC Radio 4. Retrieved November 16, 2021 – via Internet Archive.
^ "BBC Radio 4 Extra - Ray Bradbury - Fahrenheit 451". BBC. Archived from the original on November 16, 2021. Retrieved November 16, 2021.
^ "The Saturday Play: Fahrenheit 451". BBC Programme Index. July 5, 2003. Archived from the original on March 11, 2021. Retrieved July 23, 2021.
^ The Electricity Club (February 3, 2025). "LEVENTE - The Ray Bradbury Chronicles". ELECTRICITYCLUB.CO.UK. Retrieved April 17, 2025.
^ Merciez, Gil (May 1985). "Fahrenheit 451". Antic's Amiga Plus. 5 (1): 81.
^ "Macmillan: Ray Bradbury's Fahrenheit 451: The Authorized Adaptation Ray Bradbury, Tim Hamilton: Books". Us.macmillan.com. Archived from the original on September 27, 2009. Retrieved September 21, 2009.
^ Neary, Lynn (July 30, 2009). "Reimagining 'Fahrenheit 451' As A Graphic Novel". All Things Considered. NPR. Archived from the original on March 17, 2014. Retrieved March 17, 2014.
^ Maury, Laurel (July 30, 2009). "Bradbury Classic In Vivid, 'Necessary' Graphic Form". NPR. Archived from the original on March 17, 2014. Retrieved March 17, 2014.
^ Minzesheimer, Bob (August 2, 2009). "Graphic novel of 'Fahrenheit 451' sparks Bradbury's approval". USA Today. Archived from the original on October 19, 2015. Retrieved December 18, 2017.
^ "Fahrenheit 9/11". Box Office Mojo. Archived from the original on October 15, 2011. Retrieved October 2, 2011.
^ ""Fahrenheit 451" author wants title back". Hardball with Chris Matthews. NBC News. June 29, 2004. Archived from the original on February 24, 2020. Retrieved April 16, 2020.
^ "Call it a tale of two 'Fahrenheits'". MSNBC. June 29, 2004. Archived from the original on November 5, 2012. Retrieved August 15, 2016.
^ France, Lisa Respers (May 17, 2017). "Michael Moore's surprise Trump doc: What we know". cnn.com. CNN. Archived from the original on March 8, 2021. Retrieved September 5, 2018.
^ Nottingham, Mark (December 21, 2015). "mnot's blog: Why 451?". Archived from the original on December 29, 2015. Retrieved December 21, 2015.
^ "An HTTP Status Code to Report Legal Obstacles". Internet Engineering Steering Group. December 21, 2015. Archived from the original on February 29, 2016. Retrieved December 21, 2015.
^ T. Bray (February 2016). An HTTP Status Code to Report Legal Obstacles. Internet Engineering Task Force. doi:10.17487/RFC7725. ISSN 2070-1721. RFC 7725. Proposed Standard. Thanks also to Ray Bradbury.
^ "What is Error 451?". Open Rights Group. Archived from the original on November 17, 2021. Retrieved December 21, 2015.
^ Blizzard Entertainment. "Starcraft" (PDF). Archived (PDF) from the original on March 22, 2014.
^ LeBlanc, Marc (June 2023). "OG System Shock dev plays remake 1". YouTube. Retrieved August 18, 2023.


## Further reading
McGiveron, R. O. (1996). "What 'Carried the Trick'? Mass Exploitation and the Decline of Thought in Ray Bradbury's Fahrenheit 451". Extrapolation. 37 (3). Liverpool University Press: 245–256. doi:10.3828/extr.1996.37.3.245. ISSN 0014-5483.
McGiveron, R. O. (1996). "Bradbury's Fahrenheit 451". Explicator. 54 (3): 177–180. doi:10.1080/00144940.1996.9934107. ISSN 0014-4940.
Smolla, Rodney A. (April 2009). "The Life of the Mind and a Life of Meaning: Reflections on Fahrenheit 451" (PDF). Michigan Law Review. 107 (6): 895–912. ISSN 0026-2234.


## External links
Quotations related to Fahrenheit 451 at Wikiquote
Media related to Fahrenheit 451 at Wikimedia Commons
Fahrenheit 451 title listing at the Internet Speculative Fiction Database
v
t
e
The Martian Chronicles (1950)
Fahrenheit 451 (1953)
Dandelion Wine (1957)
Something Wicked This Way Comes (1962)
The Halloween Tree (1972)
Death Is a Lonely Business (1985)
A Graveyard for Lunatics (1990)
Green Shadows, White Whale (1992)
From the Dust Returned (2001)
Let's All Kill Constance (2002)
Farewell Summer (2006)
"Hollerbochen's Dilemma" (1938)
"The Scythe" (1943)
"I, Rocket" (1944)
"The Lake" (1944)
"Frost and Fire" (1946)
"The Million Year Picnic" (1946)
"The Small Assassin" (1946)
"I See You Never" (1947)
"Fever Dream" (1948)
"The Fruit at the Bottom of the Bowl" (1948)
"The Long Years" (1948)
"Mars Is Heaven!" (1948)
"Dark They Were, and Golden-Eyed" (1949)
"The Exiles" (1949)
"Marionettes, Inc." (1949)
"The Long Rain" (1950)
"The Rocket" (1950)
"There Will Come Soft Rains" (1950)
"The Veldt" (1950)
"Ylla" (1950)
"Embroidery" (1951)
"The Fog Horn" (1951)
"Here There Be Tygers" (1951)
"The Pedestrian" (1951)
"The April Witch" (1952)
"A Sound of Thunder" (1952)
"The Wilderness" (1952)
"The Flying Machine" (1953)
"The Golden Kite, the Silver Wind" (1953)
"The Meadow" (1953)
"The Murderer" (1953)
"Sun and Shadow" (1953)
"All Summer in a Day" (1954)
"The Dragon" (1955)
"The Aqueduct" (1979)
"Banshee" (1984)
"The Toynbee Convector" (1984)
"Is That You, Herb?" (2003)
Dark Carnival (1947)
The Illustrated Man (1951)
The Golden Apples of the Sun (1953)
The October Country (1955)
A Medicine for Melancholy (1959)
The Day It Rained Forever (1959)
The Small Assassin (1962)
R Is for Rocket (1962)
The Machineries of Joy (1964)
The Vintage Bradbury (1965)
S Is for Space (1966)
Twice 22 (1966)
I Sing the Body Electric! (1969)
Ray Bradbury (1975)
Long After Midnight (1976)
The Fog Horn & Other Stories (1979)
The Last Circus and the Electrocution (1980)
The Stories of Ray Bradbury (1980)
The Fog Horn and Other Stories (1980)
Dinosaur Tales (1983)
A Memory of Murder (1984)
The Toynbee Convector (1988)
Classic Stories 1 (1990)
Classic Stories 2 (1990)
The Parrot Who Met Papa (1991)
Selected from Dark They Were, and Golden-Eyed (1991)
Quicker Than the Eye (1996)
Driving Blind (1997)
Ray Bradbury Collected Short Stories (2001)
One More for the Road (2002)
Bradbury Stories: 100 of His Most Celebrated Tales (2003)
The Cat's Pajamas: Stories (2004)
A Sound of Thunder and Other Stories (2005)
The Dragon Who Ate His Tail (2007)
Summer Morning, Summer Night (2007)
A Pleasure to Burn (2010)
The Collected Stories of Ray Bradbury (2011, 2014)
The Meadow (1947)
The Flying Machine: A One-Act Play for Three Men (1953)
The Wonderful Ice Cream Suit and Other Plays (1972)
Pillar of Fire and Other Plays (1975)
The Martian Chronicles (1986)
The Wonderful Ice Cream Suit (1986)
Fahrenheit 451 (1986)
Dandelion Wine (1988)
The Veldt (1988)
It Came from Outer Space (1953)
The Beast from 20,000 Fathoms (1953)
Moby Dick (1956 screenplay)
"I Sing the Body Electric" (1962)
The Autumn People (1965)
Tomorrow Midnight (1966)
Fahrenheit 451 (1966)
The Picasso Summer (1969)
The Illustrated Man (1969)
The Martian Chronicles (1980 miniseries)
The Electric Grandmother (1982)
Something Wicked This Way Comes (1983)
Bradbury 13 (radio series, 1983–84)
Fahrenheit 451 (1984)
"The Burning Man" (1985)
The Veldt (1987)
The Ray Bradbury Theater (TV series, 1985–86, 1988-1992)
The Halloween Tree (1993)
Dandelion Wine (1997)
The Wonderful Ice Cream Suit (1998)
A Sound of Thunder (2005)
Ray Bradbury's Chrysalis (2008)
The Whispers (2015)
Fahrenheit 451 (2018)
Futuria Fantasia (1939–1940)
The Mummies of Guanajuato (1978)
Zen in the Art of Writing (1990)
It Came from Outer Space (2003 book)
Guy Montag
Bettina F. Bradbury (daughter)
Spaceship Earth
Ray Bradbury Center
Bradbury Landing
Ray Bradbury Award
Fuck Me, Ray Bradbury
Dandelion crater
"Treehouse of Horror Presents: Simpsons Wicked This Way Comes"
v
t
e
The Sword in the Stone by T. H. White (1939)
Slan by A. E. van Vogt (1941)
Beyond This Horizon by Anson MacDonald (1943)
Conjure Wife by Fritz Leiber (1944)
Shadow Over Mars by Leigh Brackett (1945)
The Mule by Isaac Asimov (1946)
Farmer in the Sky by Robert A. Heinlein (1951)
Fahrenheit 451 by Ray Bradbury (1954)
The Demolished Man by Alfred Bester (1953)
They'd Rather Be Right (aka: The Forever Machine) by Mark Clifton and Frank Riley (1955)
Double Star by Robert A. Heinlein (1956)
The Big Time by Fritz Leiber (1958)
A Case of Conscience by James Blish (1959)
Starship Troopers by Robert A. Heinlein (1960)
A Canticle for Leibowitz by Walter M. Miller, Jr. (1961)
Stranger in a Strange Land by Robert A. Heinlein (1962)
The Man in the High Castle by Philip K. Dick (1963)
Here Gather the Stars (aka: Way Station) by Clifford D. Simak (1964)
The Wanderer by Fritz Leiber (1965)
Dune by Frank Herbert / ...And Call Me Conrad (aka: This Immortal) by Roger Zelazny (1966)
The Moon Is a Harsh Mistress by Robert A. Heinlein (1967)
Lord of Light by Roger Zelazny (1968)
Stand on Zanzibar by John Brunner (1969)
The Left Hand of Darkness by Ursula K. Le Guin (1970)
Ringworld by Larry Niven (1971)
To Your Scattered Bodies Go by Philip José Farmer (1972)
The Gods Themselves by Isaac Asimov (1973)
Rendezvous with Rama by Arthur C. Clarke (1974)
The Dispossessed by Ursula K. Le Guin (1975)
The Forever War by Joe Haldeman (1976)
Where Late the Sweet Birds Sang by Kate Wilhelm (1977)
Gateway by Frederik Pohl (1978)
Dreamsnake by Vonda N. McIntyre (1979)
The Fountains of Paradise by Arthur C. Clarke (1980)
The Snow Queen by Joan D. Vinge (1981)
Downbelow Station by C. J. Cherryh (1982)
Foundation's Edge by Isaac Asimov (1983)
Startide Rising by David Brin (1984)
Neuromancer by William Gibson (1985)
Ender's Game by Orson Scott Card (1986)
Speaker for the Dead by Orson Scott Card (1987)
The Uplift War by David Brin (1988)
Cyteen by C. J. Cherryh (1989)
Hyperion by Dan Simmons (1990)
The Vor Game by Lois McMaster Bujold (1991)
Barrayar by Lois McMaster Bujold (1992)
A Fire Upon the Deep by Vernor Vinge / Doomsday Book by Connie Willis (1993)
Green Mars by Kim Stanley Robinson (1994)
Mirror Dance by Lois McMaster Bujold (1995)
The Diamond Age by Neal Stephenson (1996)
Blue Mars by Kim Stanley Robinson (1997)
Forever Peace by Joe Haldeman (1998)
To Say Nothing of the Dog by Connie Willis (1999)
A Deepness in the Sky by Vernor Vinge (2000)
Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire by J. K. Rowling (2001)
American Gods by Neil Gaiman (2002)
Hominids by Robert J. Sawyer (2003)
Paladin of Souls by Lois McMaster Bujold (2004)
Jonathan Strange & Mr Norrell by Susanna Clarke (2005)
Spin by Robert Charles Wilson (2006)
Rainbows End by Vernor Vinge (2007)
The Yiddish Policemen's Union by Michael Chabon (2008)
The Graveyard Book by Neil Gaiman (2009)
The Windup Girl by Paolo Bacigalupi / The City & the City by China Miéville (2010)
Blackout/All Clear by Connie Willis (2011)
Among Others by Jo Walton (2012)
Redshirts by John Scalzi (2013)
Ancillary Justice by Ann Leckie (2014)
The Three-Body Problem by Cixin Liu, translated by Ken Liu (2015)
The Fifth Season by N. K. Jemisin (2016)
The Obelisk Gate by N. K. Jemisin (2017)
The Stone Sky by N. K. Jemisin (2018)
The Calculating Stars by Mary Robinette Kowal (2019)
A Memory Called Empire by Arkady Martine (2020)
Network Effect by Martha Wells (2021)
A Desolation Called Peace by Arkady Martine (2022)
Nettle & Bone by T. Kingfisher (2023)
Some Desperate Glory by Emily Tesh (2024)
VIAF
Germany
United States
France
BnF data
Poland
Israel
IdRef
MusicBrainz work2
2


URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Childhood%27s_End
Content:

Childhood's End is a 1953 science fiction novel by the British author Arthur C. Clarke. The story follows the peaceful alien invasion[1] of Earth by the mysterious Overlords, whose arrival begins decades of apparent utopia under indirect alien rule, at the cost of human identity and culture.
Clarke's idea for the book began with his short story "Guardian Angel" (published in New Worlds #8, winter 1950), which he expanded into a novel in 1952, incorporating it as the first part of the book, "Earth and the Overlords". Completed and published in 1953, Childhood's End sold out its first printing, received good reviews and became Clarke's first successful novel. The book is often regarded by both readers and critics as Clarke's best novel[2] and is described as "a classic of alien literature".[3] Along with The Songs of Distant Earth (1986), Clarke considered Childhood's End to be one of his favourites of his own novels.[4] The novel was nominated for the Retro Hugo Award for Best Novel in 2004.
Several attempts to adapt the novel into a film or miniseries have been made with varying levels of success. Director Stanley Kubrick expressed interest in the 1960s, but collaborated with Clarke on 2001: A Space Odyssey (1968) instead. The novel's theme of transcendent evolution also appears in Clarke's Space Odyssey series. In 1997, the BBC produced a two-hour radio dramatization of Childhood's End that was adapted by Tony Mulholland. The Syfy Channel produced a three-part, four-hour television miniseries of Childhood's End, which was broadcast on 14–16 December 2015.


## Plot summary
In the late 20th century, the United States and the Soviet Union are competing to launch the first spacecraft into orbit when alien spaceships suddenly position themselves above Earth's principal cities. After one week, the aliens announce they are assuming supervision of international affairs, to prevent humanity's extinction. They become known as the Overlords. In general, they let humans go on conducting their affairs in their own way, although some humans are suspicious of the Overlords' benign intent, as they never allow themselves to be seen.
The Overlord Karellen, the "Supervisor for Earth", periodically meets with Rikki Stormgren, the Secretary-General of the United Nations. Karellen tells Stormgren that the Overlords will reveal themselves in 50 years, when humanity will have become used to their presence. When the Overlords finally reveal their appearance, they resemble the traditional Christian folk images of demons, with cloven hooves, leathery wings, horns, and barbed tails. Humankind enters a golden age of prosperity at the expense of creativity.
The Overlords are interested in psychic research, which humans suppose is part of their anthropological study. Rupert Boyce, a prolific book collector on the subject, allows one Overlord, Rashaverak, to study these books at his home. To impress his friends with Rashaverak's presence, Boyce holds a party, during which he makes use of a Ouija board. Jan Rodricks, an astrophysicist and Rupert's brother-in-law, asks the identity of the Overlords' home star. The Ouija board reveals a number which Jan recognizes as a star-catalogue number and learns that it is consistent with the direction in which Overlord supply ships appear and disappear. Jan stows away on an Overlord supply ship and travels 40 light years to their home planet.
Well over a century after the Overlords' arrival, human children, beginning with the Greggsons', begin to display clairvoyance and telekinetic powers. Karellen reveals the Overlords' purpose: they serve the Overmind, a vast cosmic intelligence, as a kind of "bridge species", fostering other races' eventual union with it.
As Rashaverak explains, the time of humanity as a race composed of single individuals with a concrete identity is coming to an end. The children's minds reach into each other and merge into a single vast group consciousness. For the transformed children's safety, they are segregated on a continent of their own. No more human children are born and many parents die or commit suicide.
When Jan Rodricks returns to Earth, he finds an unexpectedly altered planet. Humanity has effectively become extinct and he is now the last man alive. Some Overlords remain on Earth to study the children from a safe distance. When the evolved children mentally alter the Moon's rotation and make other planetary manipulations, it becomes too dangerous to remain. The departing Overlords offer to take Rodricks with them, but he chooses to stay to witness Earth's end and transmit a report of what he sees. His transmission ends with a view of a column of light stretching into the sky, the Earth becoming transparent, and a glow from within the core just before the Earth explodes, its energy siphoned by the departing children.
As his ship speeds away, Karellen somberly turns his back on a display of the sun.


## Publication history


### Development
The novel first took shape in July 1946, when Clarke wrote "Guardian Angel", a short story that would eventually become Part I of Childhood's End. Clarke's portrayal of the Overlords as devils was influenced by John W. Campbell's depiction of the devilish Teff-Hellani species in The Mightiest Machine,[2] first serialized in Astounding Stories in 1934. After finishing "Guardian Angel", Clarke enrolled at King's College London and served as the chairman of the British Interplanetary Society from 1946 to 1947 and from 1951 to 1953. He earned a first-class degree in mathematics and physics from King's in 1948, after which he worked as an assistant editor for Science Abstracts. "Guardian Angel" was submitted for publication but was rejected by several editors, including Campbell. At the request of Clarke's agent and unbeknown to Clarke, the story was edited by James Blish, who rewrote the ending. Blish's version of the story was accepted for publication in April 1950 by Famous Fantastic Mysteries magazine.[6] Clarke's original version of "Guardian Angel" was later published in the Winter 1950 issue of New Worlds magazine.[7]
After Clarke's nonfiction science book The Exploration of Space (1951) was successfully received, he began to focus on his writing career. In February 1952, Clarke started working on the novelization of "Guardian Angel"; he completed a first draft of the novel Childhood's End in December, and a final revision in January 1953.[8] Clarke travelled to New York in April 1953 with the novel and several of his other works. Literary agent Bernard Shir-Cliff convinced Ballantine Books to buy everything Clarke had, including Childhood's End, "Encounter in the Dawn" (1953), (which Ballantine retitled Expedition to Earth), and Prelude to Space (1951). However, Clarke had composed two different endings for the novel, and the last chapter of Childhood's End was still not finished.[9] Clarke proceeded to Tampa Bay, Florida, to go scuba diving with George Grisinger, and on his way there visited his friend Frederick C. Durant – President of the International Astronautical Federation from 1953 to 1956 – and his family in the Washington Metropolitan Area, whilst he continued working on the last chapter. He next traveled to Atlanta, Georgia, where he visited Ian Macauley, a friend who was active in the civil rights movement. Clarke finished the final chapter in Atlanta while Clarke and Macauley discussed racial issues; these conversations may have influenced the development of the last chapter, particularly Clarke's choice to make the character of Jan Rodricks – the last surviving member of the human species – a black man.[10]
Clarke arrived in Florida at the end of April. The short story, "The Man Who Ploughed the Sea", included in the Tales from the White Hart (1957) collection, was influenced by his time in Florida. While in Key Largo in late May, Clarke met Marilyn Mayfield, and after a romance lasting less than three weeks, they travelled to Manhattan and married at New York City Hall. The couple spent their honeymoon in the Pocono Mountains in Pennsylvania, where Clarke proofread Childhood's End. In July, Clarke returned to England with Mayfield, but it quickly became clear that the marriage would not last as Clarke spent most of his time reading and writing, and talking about his work. Further, Clarke wanted to be a father, and Marilyn, who had a son from a previous marriage, informed Clarke after their marriage that she could no longer have children. When Childhood's End was published the following month, it appeared with a dedication: "To Marilyn, For letting me read the proofs on our honeymoon." The couple separated after a few months together, but remained married for the next decade.[11]


### Publication
Ballantine wanted to publish Childhood's End before Expedition to Earth and Prelude to Space, but Clarke wanted to wait. He felt that it was a difficult book to release. He had written two different endings for the novel and was unsure of which to use. According to biographer Neil McAleer, Clarke's uncertainty may have been because of its thematic focus on the paranormal and transcendence with the alien Overmind. While the theme was used effectively by Clarke in the novel, McAleer wrote that "it was not science fiction based on science, which he came to advocate and represent". When he wrote Childhood's End, Clarke was interested in the paranormal, and did not become a sceptic until much later in his life.[12] Ballantine persuaded Clarke to let them publish Childhood's End first, and it was published in August 1953, with a cover designed by American science fiction illustrator Richard M. Powers.[13] Childhood's End first appeared in paperback and hardcover editions, with the paperback as the primary edition, an unusual approach for the 1950s. For the first time in his career, Clarke became known as a novelist.[12]
Decades later, Clarke was preparing a new edition of Childhood's End after the story had become dated. The initial chapter of the 1953 novel correctly foresees a race between the US and Soviet Union to first land men on the Moon (and the prominence of German rocket scientists in both space programs), but sets it later than it would actually happen (post-1975; the exact year is not given in the text, but 1945 is said to be more than thirty years ago). After the book was first published, the Apollo missions landed humans on the Moon in 1969, and in 1989 US President George H. W. Bush announced the Space Exploration Initiative (SEI), calling for astronauts to eventually explore Mars. In 1990, Clarke added a new foreword and rewrote the first chapter, placing it in the early 21st century, changing the goal from the Moon to Mars, and implying a joint effort rather than a race.[8] Editions since have appeared with the original opening or have included both versions. "Guardian Angel" has also appeared in two short story collections: The Sentinel (1983), and The Collected Stories of Arthur C. Clarke (2001).
On October 28, 2008, Audible released a 7-hour 47 minute unabridged audiobook version of Childhood's End, narrated by Eric Michael Summerer, under its Audible Frontiers imprint. An AudioFile review commended Summerer's narration as "smoothly presented and fully credible".[14] An audio introduction and commentary is provided by Canadian science fiction author Robert J. Sawyer.[15]


## Reception
The novel was well received by most readers and critics.[16] Two months after publication, all 210,000 copies of the first printing had been sold.[17] The New York Times published two positive reviews of the book: Basil Davenport compared Clarke to Olaf Stapledon, C. S. Lewis, and H. G. Wells, a "very small group of writers who have used science fiction as the vehicle of philosophic ideas".[18] William DuBois called the book "a first rate tour de force that is well worth the attention of every thoughtful citizen in this age of anxiety".[19] Don Guzman of the Los Angeles Times admired the novel for its suspense, wisdom, and beauty. He compared Clarke's role as a writer to that of an artist, "a master of sonorous language, a painter of pictures in futuristic colors, a Chesley Bonestell with words".[20] Galaxy reviewer Groff Conklin called the novel "a formidably impressive job ... a continuous kaleidoscope of the unexpected".[21] While acknowledging "inexpressible unpleasant and uncomfortable feelings after reading it", Japanese author Yukio Mishima declared, "I'm not afraid to call it a masterpiece."[citation needed]
Anthony Boucher and J. Francis McComas were more skeptical, and faulted the novel's "curious imbalance between its large-scale history and a number of episodic small-scale stories". While praising Clarke's work as "Stapledonian [for] its historic concepts and also for the quality of its prose and thinking", they concluded that Childhood's End was "an awkward and imperfect book".[22] P. Schuyler Miller said the novel was "all imagination and poetry", but concluded it was "not up to some of Clarke's other writing" due to weakness in its "episodic structure".[23]
Brian W. Aldiss and David Wingrove wrote that Childhood's End rested on "a rather banal philosophical idea...expressed in simple but aspiring language that vaguely recalls the Psalms combined with a dramatized sense of loss [for] undeniable effect".[24]
In 2004 Childhood's End was nominated for a retrospective Hugo Award for Best Novel for 1954.[25] In 2021, the novel was one of six classic science fiction novels by British authors selected by Royal Mail to feature on a series of UK postage stamps.[26]


## Adaptations
In the 1960s, director Stanley Kubrick was interested in making a film adaptation of the novel, but blacklisted director Abraham Polonsky had already optioned it. Instead, Kubrick collaborated with Clarke on adapting the short story "The Sentinel" into what eventually became 2001: A Space Odyssey (1968).[27] Months before his performance at Woodstock in 1969, folk singer and guitarist Richie Havens told Ebony magazine about his appreciation of Clarke's story and expressed his interest in working on a future film adaptation of Childhood's End.[28] Screenplays by Polonsky and Howard Koch were never made into films.[29]
David Elgood first proposed a radio adaptation of the novel in 1974, but nothing came of it in that decade.[citation needed]
Philip DeGuere, whose credits include the TV series Alias Smith and Jones, developed a script in the late 1970s for Universal, who planned to film it initially as a six-hour mini-series for CBS Television, and later as a two- or three-hour telemovie for ABC. However, Universal discovered that its contracts with Arthur C. Clarke – some of which dated back to 1957 – were out of date. These contractual difficulties were resolved in 1979 and DeGuere worked with legendary comic book artist Neal Adams on preproduction drawings and other material. The project had Clarke's approval. However Universal decided that the budget required would be nearly $40 million and they were only prepared to spend $10 million, so the movie was not made.[30]
Director Brian Lighthill revisited the radio adaptation proposal and obtained the rights in 1995. After Lighthill received a go-ahead from BBC Radio in 1996, he commissioned a script from Tony Mulholland, resulting in a new, two-part adaptation. The BBC produced the two-hour radio dramatization of the novel, and broadcast it on BBC Radio 4 in November 1997. The recording was released on cassette by BBC Audiobooks in 1998 and on CD in 2007.[31]
As of 2002[update], film rights to the novel were held by Universal Pictures, with director Kimberly Peirce attached to a project.[32]
On April 10, 2013, the Syfy Channel announced its plans to develop a Childhood's End TV miniseries.[33][full citation needed] The three-episode, four-hour production premiered December 14, 2015. Charles Dance portrays the Supervisor Karellen.
An illustration of an Overlord as depicted by artist Wayne Barlowe was published in Barlowe's Guide to Extraterrestrials.[34]


## Legacy
Childhood's End has inspired the work of many contemporary musicians and artists. These include Pink Floyd (Childhood's End),[35][36] Van der Graaf Generator (Childlike Faith in Childhood's End),[37][36] David Bowie (Oh! You Pretty Things),[38] and Genesis (Watcher of the Skies).[39][36]The novel also inspired the Hipgnosis cover art for Led Zeppelin's Houses of the Holy.[40][41]
The sixth episode of the 2023 Netflix series Gamera Rebirth was titled "Childhood’s end" as an homage to Arthur C. Clarke.[42]


## See also
1950s portal
Novels portal
Speculative fiction portal
1953 in science fiction
Earth: Final Conflict
First contact (science fiction)
Golden Age of Science Fiction
The Cosmic Rape
Zoo hypothesis


## Notes
^ Booker & Thomas 2009, pp. 31–32.
^ a b McAleer 1992, p. 88.
^ Dick 2001, pp. 127–129.
^ Cordeiro 2008, pp. 47–50.
^ Childhood's End, pp. vii–viii.
^ Clarke 2000, p. 203. See also: ACC Photographic reproduction of the first pages of the original tale, "Guardian Angel". Fantastic Mysteries. Vol. 11, no. 4. April 1950. pp. 98–112, 127–129.
^ Samuelson 1973.
^ a b Childhood's End, p. v.
^ McAleer 1992, pp. 89–91.
^ McAleer 1992, pp. 91–92.
^ McAleer 1992, pp. 92–100.
^ a b McAleer 1992, pp. 90–91.
^ "Publication Listing". isfdb.org. Internet Speculative Fiction Database. 20 March 2009.
^ McCarty 2009.
^ Childhood's End. Audible.
^ Howes 1977; McAleer 1992.
^ McAleer 1992, p. 99.
^ Davenport 1953, p. BR19.
^ Du Bois 1953.
^ Guzman 1953, p. D5.
^ "Galaxy's 5 Star Shelf", Galaxy Science Fiction, January 1954, p.129
^ "Recommended Reading", F&SF, October 1953, p. 72.
^ "The Reference Library", Astounding Science Fiction, February 1954, pp.151
^ Brian W. Aldiss and David Wingrove, Trillion Year Spree, Victor Gollancz, 1986, p.308
^ "1954 Retro-Hugo Awards". Archived 2011-05-07 at the Wayback Machine The Hugo Awards. Retrieved 24 April 2016.
^ "Stamps to feature original artworks celebrating classic science fiction novels". The Press. York, England. 9 April 2021. Retrieved 20 September 2022.
^ Baxter 1997, pp. 199–230. See also: Buhle & Wagner 2002.
^ Bogle 1969, pp. 107–108.
^ For a brief discussion as to why novels like Childhood's End have not been adapted into films, and the challenges involved in production, see Beale, Lewis (8 July 2001). "A Genre of the Intellect With Little Use for Ideas". The New York Times. p. 12. ISSN 0362-4331.
^ "A Difficult Childhood: The Unmanifested Destiny of Arthur C. Clarke's "Childhood's End'", in David Hughes, The Greatest Sci-Fi Movies Never Made. Chicago, Illinois: A Capella Books, 2001, pp. 18–23.
^ Pixley 2007.
^ Elder & Hart 2008, p. 9.
^ "Syfy to Adapt Childhood's End, Ringworld, The Lotus Caves and More!"
^ Barlowe 1987.
^ "Childhood's End — Pink Floyd". Last.fm. 19 May 2024. Retrieved 17 November 2024.
^ a b c Ewingpublished, Jerry (20 July 2019). "Eleven great prog tracks about space". louder. Retrieved 17 November 2024.
^ Boaz, Joachim (23 May 2011). "Science Fiction Inspired Song: Van der Graaf Generator's 'Childlike Faith in Childhood's End' (1976)". Science Fiction and Other Suspect Ruminations. Retrieved 17 November 2024.
^ "Childhood's End". Pushing Ahead of the Dame. Retrieved 17 November 2024.
^ Brick, Musical (4 June 2015). "Alien Themed Genesis Songs - Musical Brick". musicalbrick.com. Retrieved 17 November 2024.
^ Music, This Day In (31 January 2022). "Houses Of The Holy". This Day In Music. Retrieved 17 November 2024.
^ Sweeting, Adam (18 April 2013). "Storm Thorgerson obituary". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Retrieved 17 November 2024.
^ Gamera Rebirth Production Committee (29 January 2024). GAMERA REBIRTH 公式設定資料集 [GAMERA Rebirth: Official Setting Materials] (in Japanese). Kadokawa Shoten. pp. 110–111. ISBN 9784041138410.


## References
Barlowe, Wayne Douglas (1987). Barlowe's Guide to Extraterrestrials. Workman Publishing Company. ISBN 0-89480-500-2.
Baxter, John (1997). "Kubrick Beyond the Infinite". Stanley Kubrick: A Biography. Basic Books. pp. 199–230. ISBN 0-7867-0485-3.
Bogle, Donald E. (May 1969). "Richie Havens". Ebony. 24 (7): 101–108.
Booker, M. Keith; Thomas, Anne-Marie (2009). "The Alien Invasion Narrative". The Science Fiction Handbook. John Wiley & Sons. ISBN 978-1-4051-6205-0.
Buhle, Paul; Wagner, Dave (2002). A Very Dangerous Citizen: Abraham Lincoln Polonsky and the Hollywood Left. University of California Press. ISBN 0-520-23672-6.
Clarke, Arthur C. (1990) [1953]. Childhood's End. Del Rey Books. ISBN 0-345-34795-1.
Clarke, Arthur C. (2000). "Guardian Angel". The Collected Stories of Arthur C. Clarke. Tor Books. pp. 203–224. ISBN 0-312-87821-4.
Cordeiro, José Luis (July–August 2008). "Tribute to Sir Arthur C. Clarke". The Futurist. 42 (4). World Future Society. ISSN 0016-3317.
Davenport, Basil (23 August 1953). "The End, and the Beginning, of Man". The New York Times. p. BR19.
Dick, Steven J. (2001). "The Alien Comes of Age: Clarke to E.T. and Beyond". Life on Other Worlds: The 20th-Century Extraterrestrial Life Debate. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 0-521-79912-0.
Du Bois, William (27 August 1953). "Childhood's End". The New York Times. Retrieved 2 January 2011.
Elder, Robert K.; Hart, Maureen M. (28 March 2008). "Director put soldiers 1st in her film". Chicago Tribune. p. 9.
Guzman, Don (30 August 1953). "'Childhood's End' Brings Beauty to Science Fiction". Los Angeles Times. p. D5.
Howes, Alan B. (1977). "Expectation and Surprise in Childhood's End". In Martin Harry Greenberg; Joseph D. Olander (eds.). Arthur C. Clarke. Taplinger Publishing Company. pp. 149–171. ISBN 0-8008-0402-3.
McAleer, Neil (1992). Arthur C. Clarke: The Authorized Biography. Chicago: Contemporary Books. ISBN 0-8092-3720-2.
McCarty, Joyce E. (February 2009). "Childhood's End". AudioFile.
Pixley, Andrew (2007) [1997]. BBC Classic Radio Sci-Fi: Childhood's End. BBC Audiobooks. ISBN 978-1-4056-7786-8.
Samuelson, David N. (Spring 1973). "Childhood's End: A Median Stage of Adolescence?". Science Fiction Studies. 1, Part 1. DePauw University.


## Further reading
Beatie, Bruce A. (Spring 1989). "Arthur C. Clarke and the Alien Encounter". Extrapolation. 30 (1): 53–69. doi:10.3828/extr.1989.30.1.53.
Candelaria, Matthew (January 2002). "The Overlord's Burden: The Source of Sorrow in Childhood's End". Ariel. 33 (1). University of Calgary: 37–58. Archived from the original on 6 July 2011.
Clarke, Bruce (2008). Posthuman Metamorphosis: Narrative and Systems. Fordham University Press. ISBN 978-0-8232-2851-5.
Clark, Stephen R. L. (1995). "Childhood end". How to Live Forever: Science Fiction and Philosophy. Routledge. pp. 154–156. ISBN 0-415-12626-6.
Clareson, Thomas D. (1976). "The Cosmic Loneliness of Arthur C. Clarke". Voices for the Future: Essays on Major Science Fiction Writers. Popular Press. pp. 216–237. ISBN 0-87972-120-0.
Feenberg, Andrew (March 1977). "An End to History: Science Fiction in the Nuclear Age". Johns Hopkins Magazine. pp. 12–22.
Gordon, Andrew (1 September 1980). "Close Encounters". Literature/Film Quarterly. 8 (3). Salisbury University: 156–164. ISSN 0090-4260.
Goswami, Amit (1985). The Cosmic Dancers: Exploring the Physics of Science Fiction. Mcgraw-Hill. ISBN 0-07-023867-7.
Hillegas, Mark R. (1967). The Future as Nightmare: H.G. Wells and the Anti-Utopians. Oxford University Press. pp. 153–154 17. ISBN 0-8093-0676-X.
Hollow, John (1987) [1983]. Against the Night, the Stars: The Science Fiction of Arthur C. Clarke. Harcourt Brace Jovanovich. ISBN 0-15-103966-6.
Hughes, David (2008). "A Difficult Childhood". The Greatest Sci-fi Movies Never Made (2 ed.). Titan Books. pp. 18–23. ISBN 978-1-84576-755-6.
Hull, Elizabeth Anne (1997). "On His Shoulders: Shaw's Influence On Clarke's Childhood's End". In Milton T. Wolf (ed.). Shaw and Science Fiction. Pennsylvania State University Press. pp. 107–132. ISBN 978-0-271-01681-8.
Huntington, John (Spring 1974). "The Unity of "Childhood's End"". Science Fiction Studies. 1 (3). DePauw University: 154–164.
James, Edward; Mendlesohn, Farah (2003). The Cambridge Companion to Science Fiction. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 0-511-07518-9.
Lewis, Dave (1994). The Complete Guide to the Music of Led Zeppelin. Omnibus Press. ISBN 0-7119-3528-9.
Olander, Joseph D; Martin Harry Greenberg (1977). Arthur C. Clarke. P. Harris. ISBN 0-904505-41-3.
"Out of Space". The Economist. Vol. 343, no. 8012. 12 April 1997. pp. 85–86. ISSN 0013-0613.
Rabkin, Eric S. (1980). Arthur C. Clarke (2 ed.). Wildside Press. ISBN 0-916732-21-5.
Rickels, Laurence (2008). The Devil Notebooks. University of Minnesota Press. ISBN 978-0-8166-5052-1.
Schwam, Stephanie (2000). The Making of 2001, A Space Odyssey. Random House, Inc. ISBN 0-375-75528-4.
Westfahl, Gary (2005). The Greenwood Encyclopedia of Science Fiction and Fantasy: Themes, Works, and Wonders. Vol. 3. Greenwood Publishing Group. ISBN 0-313-32950-8.
Westfahl, Gary; George Edgar Slusser (1999). Nursery Realms. University of Georgia Press. pp. 15–17. ISBN 0-8203-2144-3.


## External links
Childhood's End title listing at the Internet Speculative Fiction Database
Childhood's End, retrospective review by Jo Walton, 2012
Guardian Angel title listing at the Internet Speculative Fiction Database
"Guardian Angel" (short story) on the Internet Archive
v
t
e
Bibliography
Prelude to Space
The Sands of Mars
Islands in the Sky
Against the Fall of Night
Childhood's End
Earthlight
The City and the Stars
The Deep Range
A Fall of Moondust
Dolphin Island
Glide Path
Imperial Earth
The Fountains of Paradise
The Songs of Distant Earth
Cradle (with Gentry Lee)
The Ghost from the Grand Banks
The Hammer of God
Richter 10 (with Mike McQuay)
The Trigger (with Michael Kube-McDowell)
The Light of Other Days (with Stephen Baxter)
The Last Theorem (with Frederik Pohl)
2001: A Space Odyssey
2010: Odyssey Two
2061: Odyssey Three
3001: The Final Odyssey
Rendezvous with Rama
Rama II (with Gentry Lee)
The Garden of Rama (with Gentry Lee)
Rama Revealed (with Gentry Lee)
Time's Eye (with Stephen Baxter)
Sunstorm (with Stephen Baxter)
Firstborn (with Stephen Baxter)
Expedition to Earth
Reach for Tomorrow
Tales from the White Hart
The Other Side of the Sky
Tales of Ten Worlds
The Nine Billion Names of God
Of Time and Stars
The Wind from the Sun
The Best of Arthur C. Clarke
The Sentinel
Tales from Planet Earth
More Than One Universe
The Collected Stories of Arthur C. Clarke
Interplanetary Flight: An Introduction to Astronautics
The Lost Worlds of 2001
The View from Serendip
The Odyssey File: The Making of 2010
How the World Was One: Beyond the Global Village
An Encyclopedia of Claims, Frauds, and Hoaxes of the Occult and Supernatural
2001: A Space Odyssey (comics)
2010: The Year We Make Contact (film)
The Nine Billion Names of God (short film)
Rendezvous with Rama (video game)
"The Star" (TV episode)
The Songs of Distant Earth (album)
Rama (video game)
Childhood's End (TV miniseries)
Arthur C. Clarke in media
Sir Arthur Clarke Award
Arthur C. Clarke Award
Geostationary orbit
Clarke's three laws
Arthur C. Clarke's Mysterious World
Arthur C. Clarke's World of Strange Powers
Arthur C. Clarke's Mysterious Universe
Arthur C. Clarke Institute for Modern Technologies
God, the Universe and Everything Else
Great Basses wreck
4923 Clarke
Serendipaceratops
GRB 080319B
VIAF
United States
MusicBrainz work
MusicBrainz release group


URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Paradox_Men
Content:

The Paradox Men is a science fiction novel by American writer Charles L. Harness, his first novel. Initially published as a novella, "Flight into Yesterday", in the May 1949 issue of Startling Stories, it was republished as The Paradox Men in 1953.[1][2] The "science-fiction classic"[3] is both "a tale dominated by space-opera extravagances" and "a severely articulate narrative analysis of the implications of Arnold J. Toynbee's A Study of History."[1] Boucher and McComas described it as "fine swashbuckling adventure ... so infinitely intricate that you may never quite understand what it's about."[4] P. Schuyler Miller described it as "action-entertainment, fast-paced enough that you don't stop to bother with inconsistencies or improbabilities."[5]
In his introduction in the 1967 Four Square paperback reprint of the novel, Brian Aldiss terms it a major example of the "Widescreen Baroque" style in science fiction, and John Clute terms it "the kind of tale which transforms traditional space opera into an arena where a vast array of characters can act their hearts out, where anything can be said with a wink or dead seriously, and any kind of story be told."[1] In Trillion Year Spree, Aldiss and Wingrove report the novel "plays high, wide, and handsome with space and time, buzzes around the solar system like a demented hornet, [and] is witty, profound, and trivial all in one breath."[6] The Paradox Men features the concept of personal force fields which protect people against high-velocity weapons like guns but not against knives or swords, an idea later used in Frank Herbert's Dune (1965).[7]


## References
^ a b c Clute, John. "Unorthodox science-fiction writer." (Charles L. Harness obituary)[dead link] The Independent, October 11, 2005.
^ "I Did it For the Money." (Charles L. Harness inverview) Locus, December 1998.
^ Flight into Yesterday (1953) by Charles Harness - FantasticFiction.co.uk
^ Boucher, Anthony; McComas, J. Francis, eds. (September 1953). "Recommended Reading". The Magazine of Fantasy & Science Fiction. Vol. 5, no. 3. p. 101. ISSN 0024-984X.
^ Miller, P. Schuyler (April 1954). Campbell, John W. (ed.). "Flight into Yesterday". The Reference Library. Astounding Science Fiction. Vol. 53, no. 2. Street & Smith. p. 147. ISSN 1059-2113.
^ Aldiss & Wingrove, Trillion Year Spree, Victor Gollancz, 1986, p.324
^ Horton, Rich. "Ace Double Reviews, 18: The Paradox Men, by Charles L. Harness/Dome Around America, by Jack Williamson". sff.net. Archived from the original on June 7, 2011.


## Further reading
Conklin, Groff (January 1954). Gold, H. L. (ed.). "Flight into Yesterday". Galaxy's 5 Star Shelf. Galaxy Science Fiction. Vol. 7, no. 5. p. 132. ISSN 0016-4003.
McAulay, Ian (November 1964). Peyton, Roger G. (ed.). "The Paradox Men by Charles L. Harness" (PDF). Book Reviews and News. Vector. No. 29. British Science Fiction Association. p. 35. ISSN 0505-0448. Archived (PDF) from the original on December 24, 2022.

This article about a 1940s science fiction novel is a stub. You can help Wikipedia by expanding it.
See guidelines for writing about novels. Further suggestions might be found on the article's talk page.
v
t
e


URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bring_the_Jubilee
Content:

Bring the Jubilee is a 1953 alternate history novel by American writer Ward Moore.[2][3]
The point of divergence occurs in July 1863 when the Confederate States of America wins the Battle of Gettysburg and subsequently declares victory in a conflict referred to within the book as the "War of Southron Independence" on July 4, 1864, after the surrender of the United States of America. The novel takes place in the impoverished rump United States in the mid-20th century as war looms between the Confederacy and its rival, the German Union. History takes an unexpected turn when the protagonist Hodge Backmaker, a historian, decides to travel back in time to witness the moment when the South won the war.[4]
The phrase "Bring the Jubilee" is a reference to the chorus of the popular military song "Marching Through Georgia".


## Setting


### History
In the wake of Robert E. Lee's great victory at the Battle of Gettysburg and subsequent capture of Philadelphia, the United States was forced to recognize Confederate independence with the Treaty of Reading on July 4, 1864, which became known as Southron Independence Day. Lee succeeded Jefferson Davis to become the second Confederate President in 1865 (in reality, the Confederate Constitution set the end of Davis's term in early 1868). Although Lee tried to establish a benevolent national policy, and was able to free the slaves, his anti-imperialistic desires were thwarted by a Congress with increasingly imperialistic ambitions, which sent forces to invade Mexico and expanded southward in Latin America. The Confederacy thrived as cities like Washington-Baltimore (merged from those two cities plus Alexandria) and Leesburg (formerly Mexico City) became renowned international centers of culture and learning. The Confederacy stood as one of the world's two superpowers following the German Union's decisive victory in the Emperors' War (1914–1916) in Europe (analogous to World War I). The German Union (an apparent merger of the German and Austro-Hungarian empires) formed an alliance with a rejuvenated Spanish Empire. To maintain the balance of power, the Confederacy allied with the British Empire. Tensions grew between the CSA and the Germans up until the 1950s, and people around the world lived under constant threat of impending war, with the defenseless United States certain to be the battleground.


### Culture
The Confederacy's living standards, economic growth, political influence, education standards, and military strength are reminiscent of the post-World War II United States. Although slavery has been abolished, to a large extent because of the efforts of men such as Robert E. Lee, conditions are still poor for ethnic minorities. Immigration is encouraged nevertheless, with immigrants being made subjects (not citizens) of the Confederacy, similar to the conquered Latin American population. Suffrage is limited to males whose ancestors were Confederate citizens on July 4, 1864. Technology developed along different lines, as the internal combustion engine, incandescent light bulb, and heavier-than-air flying craft were never created. Steam-powered "minibiles" and dirigibles are the primary powered means of transportation in wealthier nations; most people still ride horses for short distances or take trains for longer trips. All communication is done by letter or telegraphs, which by this point had become a fixture in all prosperous homes in much the way that telephones had in reality, and all children learned to understand telegraphy at an early age until the act became as common and as natural as reading. Film is also still developed, with sound being produced by a machine operated by compressed air.
In sharp contrast to the Confederacy's prosperity, the United States is depicted as a rump state trapped in perpetual recession, with unemployment and corruption rampant. The U.S. is so destitute that a transcontinental railroad is never constructed past Iowa, while the Confederacy built seven. The only community of Americans who are generally prosperous are the Mormons in the western State of Deseret, who still practice polygamy. Otherwise, only successful landowners and the few lucky winners of the highly popular national lottery are able to rise above the semi-destitute lives of average citizens; most able-bodied adults are reduced to "indenting" themselves to businesspeople in exchange for the meager economic security that such affords. U.S. citizens are more hostile to Blacks than Confederates, seeing them as a major cause of the Union's downfall, and unwanted competition over the few available jobs. Those blacks who have not left the U.S. for Africa are constantly derided, harassed, threatened, and sometimes mass-lynched by whites. The Republican and Democratic parties have faded away; a new two party system consists of the Confederate-influenced Whigs and the ineffectual Populists. (The narrator lists William Jennings Bryan, George Norris, and Norman Thomas among the most famous Populists and describes the election of Whig Thomas E. Dewey as President in 1940.) The U.S. military is practically nonexistent (apparently a provision of the 1864 treaty), with foreign powers frequently deploying troops unopposed across the U.S. in regions where their nationals have been attacked—a common occurrence, as many rural areas are poorly governed and lawlessness is rampant in them; highwaymen are a constant threat to the few travelers. The long-standing economic depression has led to a rather puritanical culture favoring late marriage and few children in each family. This, combined with a ban on immigration and the emigration of ambitious young people, has resulted in an overall declining population. Higher education is in a state of decay, being more concerned with status than education, with faculty members being constantly scrutinized and summarily fired if they demonstrate "abnormal ideas", reminiscent of McCarthyism.


## Plot
The narrator of the novel is Hodgins "Hodge" McCormick Backmaker, who writes a diary of his life in our timeline, year 1877. Hodge was born in 1921 in the alternate timeline in Wappingers Falls, Dutchess County, New York. In 1938 at age 17, he travels to New York City, the largest city of the United States (and yet a backwater compared to some Confederate cities), in a desperate attempt to gain admittance to a college or university. After being robbed of his few possessions, he comes into contact with the "Grand Army", a nationalistic organization working to restore the United States to its former glory through acts of sabotage and terrorism. One of the Grand Army's operations involves counterfeiting Spanish currency, with the goal of provoking war between the Confederacy and the German Union in Spanish territories, sparing the U.S. from becoming the two superpowers' battlefield. Despite remaining critical of the organization's activities, Hodge accepts work and lodging with a Grand Army member who is using a bookstore as a front. Content to work for food and the opportunity to read at every waking hour, Hodge stays in the bookstore for six years. (Young Hodge's life is largely autobiographical of Ward Moore.) One friend he meets during this time is Consul Enfandin, an emissary of the Republic of Haiti, the only independent American republic south of the Mason–Dixon line.
Hodge leaves New York in 1944 for rural Pennsylvania, where his aspiration of becoming a historian, specializing in the war between North and South, becomes a reality when he is invited to join a co-operative society named Haggershaven. The society was founded by the children of a Confederate Major named Herbert Haggerwells, who settled after the war in the land he had helped defeat. He becomes acquainted with his recruiter Barbara Haggerwells, an emotionally disturbed research scientist on the verge of developing time travel. Many secondary characters with their own subplots are introduced during this part of the story, including some of the last few Asian-Americans alive (after a series of horrifying pogroms against their kind throughout North America) and a mysterious Spanish refugee woman who forms a love triangle with Hodge and Barbara. In 1952, the time machine has been perfected, and Hodge takes the opportunity to finally see in person the Battle of Gettysburg which was fought not far from Haggershaven. Wearing a special watch to keep track of the differences in time, he travels back in time to 1863, where he then inadvertently causes the death of Captain Herbert Haggerwells ("never to be Major now", remarks Hodge when he recognizes that the dead man was a younger version of the exalted portrait on Haggershaven's living room walls), who would have occupied Little Round Top for the South during the battle. In Hodge's timeline, Haggerwells' men held the hill so that the Confederates won the Battle of Gettysburg, paving the way for their victory over the Union in Philadelphia a year later; in the resultant timeline (our own), Union Colonel Strong Vincent's 83rd Pennsylvania Infantry and Colonel Joshua Chamberlain's 20th Maine Volunteer Infantry Regiment occupy the hill early on and successfully repel Confederate advances. In the novel, Hodge asserts that Little Round Top is the key to the battle, and thus the war. Hodge's actions have led to Union control of the hill, so events play out as they did in our timeline, much to the surprise of Hodge, who witnesses Pickett's Charge having a different outcome than he read about. The South loses the battle, and eventually the war.
With history changed to make the world we know, Hodge discovers he is unable to return to his previous reality since the circumstances that had made the development of time travel possible have been unalterably changed: technology evolves along different lines, and Haggerwells has died before siring any descendants including Barbara, so Haggershaven and the time machine will never exist. Hodge, stranded in our timeline, hires himself out as a farmhand at the estate which would have been Haggershaven but is now owned by the Thammis family. Between 1863 and 1877 (when he is writing this story), Hodge comes to realize that the changed post-war United States is in some ways superior to the equivalent timeline in his past. He also finds it fascinating that people always talk of the Civil War rather than the War of Southron Independence, since the victors' name for the war takes precedence. However, he has an ominous feeling about the inauguration of Rutherford B. Hayes, suspecting that it will end the Reconstruction Era prematurely and weaken the cause of civil rights. Hodge then explains why he felt his story had to be written down, because he has considered the possibility of other timelines existing in parallel universes but has come to the conclusion that by preventing the future he was born in, he destroyed the only dimension where travel between them was possible. With this, the story ends abruptly in mid-sentence.
An "editorial note" following the story relates how one Frederick Winter Thammis had found Hodge's diary while remodeling his house in 1953, the year the real life book came out. Frederick's father had grown up knowing Hodge as a beloved ex-servant kept on a pension after he was too old to work. The family enjoyed listening to Hodge's stories of the world he was born in, but had not thought him fully sane. The junior Thammis says the story reminds him of The Wizard of Oz. Thammis notes that he has found a watch of a unique, two-dialed design with the manuscript, and ends the book by quoting from a recent history book which asks what could possibly have caused the Confederates' failure to occupy Little Round Top, "an error with momentous consequences".


## Reception
Groff Conklin characterized the novel as "an important original work... richly and realistically imagine[d]."[5] Richard A. Lupoff described it as "one of the most ingenious parallel world stories ever written."[6] Algis Budrys, however, wrote that "Bring the Jubilee has always seemed a little labored to me."[7] P. Schuyler Miller similarly suggested the novel's appeal was limited, although he praised its mature, meticulously thought-out structure.[8]
The Jewish Daily Forward included Bring the Jubilee among "the best literary examples of alternate history."[9] Aldiss and Wingrove listed it as a "brilliant alternate history novel" and noted that its "wit and ingenuity" were influential in the genre.[10]
The theme of the Confederacy winning the Civil War and becoming an independent state was not a new one, as Winston Churchill's segment of If It Had Happened Otherwise and Murray Leinster's Sidewise in Time had toyed with the idea in the 1930s. However, Moore's book was more developed and reached a slightly wider audience than those two works, and encouraged many later writers to take up the same thread. Virtually all of them, however, depicted the USA rump state as doing better than in Moore's book. MacKinlay Kantor's magazine serial novella If the South Had Won the Civil War (1960, published in book form 1961) and Harry Turtledove's The Guns of the South (1992) also include the plot element of Robert E. Lee succeeding Jefferson Davis as President of a victorious Confederacy (Kantor's book also has Lee win at Gettysburg, while Turtledove's has him aided by time travelers the year after losing the battle). Turtledove later depicted a very different version of Confederate independence in the Southern Victory series of 11 books which begins with Lee winning the war almost 9 months before the Battle of Gettysburg would have taken place, making the questions of Pickett's Charge, Little Round Top, etc., irrelevant. Newt Gingrich and some co-authors published a trilogy of books depicting in detail an alternate history in which the Confederacy wins at Gettysburg and still the Union wins the overall war (in fact, quicker than in actual history).


## Publication history
A shorter, novella-length version of Bring the Jubilee appeared in the November 1952 issue of The Magazine of Fantasy & Science Fiction before publication of the novel.[11] Boucher and McComas praised the expansion for including "a thoroughly justified increase in background detail and depth of characterization"[12]
The novel was originally published in 1953 by Ballantine Books and Farrar, Straus & Young. It was republished in 1965 by Four Square Science Fiction.[13] It was reissued by Avon Books in the 1970s and by Del Rey Books in 1997.[14] In 2001, the novella was included in the anthology The Best Alternate History Stories of the 20th Century.[15]


## See also
Novels portal
1953 in science fiction
American Civil War alternate histories


## References
^ "Books Published Today". The New York Times: 23. September 21, 1953.
^ "Uchronia: Bring the Jubilee". www.uchronia.net.
^ "Fantastic Fiction.com: Bring the Jubilee by Ward Moore". www.fantasticfiction.com.
^ Moore, Ward (1953). Bring the Jubilee.
^ "Galaxy's 5 Star Shelf", Galaxy Science Fiction, February 1954, pp. 111-12
^ "Lupoff's Book Week", Algol 28, 1977, p. 57.
^ "Books", F&SF, October 1988, p. 35
^ "The Reference Library", Astounding Science Fiction, April 1954, pp. 144-45
^ The Appeal of Alternate History
^ Aldiss & Wingrove, Trillion Year Spree, Victor Gollancz, 1986, pp. 44, 315
^ "Publication Listing: The Magazine of Fantasy & Science Fiction, November 1952". The Internet Speculative Fiction Database. Retrieved August 7, 2009.
^ "Recommended Reading," F&SF, November 1953, p. 100.
^ "Bring the Jubilee 1965 Four Square Science Fiction Cover". Flickr. October 2008. Retrieved August 7, 2009.
^ "Title: Bring the Jubilee".
^ "Publication Listing: The Best Alternate History Stories of the 20th Century". The Internet Speculative Fiction Database. Retrieved August 7, 2009.


## External links

Bring the Jubilee at Project Gutenberg


URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Space_Merchants
Content:

The Space Merchants is a 1952 science fiction novel by American writers Frederik Pohl and Cyril M. Kornbluth. Originally published in Galaxy Science Fiction magazine as a serial entitled Gravy Planet, the novel was first published as a single volume in 1953, and has sold heavily since. It deals satirically with a hyper-developed consumerism, seen through the eyes of an advertising executive. In 1984, Pohl published a sequel, The Merchants' War. In 2012, it was included in the Library of America omnibus American Science Fiction: Four Classic Novels 1953–1956. Pohl revised the original novel in 2011 with added material and more contemporary references.


## Plot
In a vastly overpopulated world, businesses have taken the place of governments and now hold political power. States exist merely to ensure the survival of huge trans-national corporations. Advertising has become hugely aggressive and by far the best-paid profession. Through advertising, the public is constantly deluded into thinking that the quality of life is improved by all the products placed on the market. Some of the products contain addictive substances designed to make consumers dependent on them. However, the most basic elements of life are incredibly scarce, including water and fuel. Personal transport may be pedal powered, with rickshaw rides being considered a luxury. The planet Venus has just been visited and judged fit for human settlement, despite its inhospitable surface and climate; the colonists would have to endure a harsh climate for many generations until the planet could be terraformed.
The protagonist, Mitch Courtenay, is a star-class copywriter in the Fowler Schocken advertising agency who has been assigned the ad campaign which would attract colonists to Venus. But a lot more is happening than he knows about. It soon becomes a tale of mystery and intrigue, in which many of the characters are not what they seem, and Mitch's loyalties and opinions change drastically over the course of the narrative. One of the hazards he faces is a psychopathic agent of his former company, found using the same psychological techniques used to identify targets for advertising.
Mitch goes to a resort in Antarctica, only to become lost outside in a blizzard. He recovers to find that he has been shanghaied as an ordinary working stiff. His ID number tattooed on his arm has been altered so he cannot reclaim his old identity. However, his skills remain intact. He becomes the propaganda specialist for a cadre of revolutionaries (the World Conservationist Association, known as Consies), in the process becoming a convert to the cause of those he once manipulated as mere consumers. In the end he confronts those who stole his life, who are not necessarily his enemies, and those from his old life, who are not necessarily his friends.


## Publication and reception


### Origins
Whilst serving in the US Army Air Force during the Second World War, Pohl had been posted to Stornara, in south-eastern Italy, as a weather forecaster. Shortly after learning of his mother's death in 1944, and feeling somewhat homesick, he decided to start writing a novel about New York. He chose to write about the advertising industry, thinking it to be the most interesting topic in the city, and patiently wrote "a long, complicated, and very bad novel" with the title of For Some We Loved.[3]
After the war ended, in early 1946, he re-read the manuscript, and decided that its major flaw was that he had written it despite knowing nothing about advertising. Before rewriting it, he applied for advertising jobs to gain some background, and on 1 April 1946 joined a small Madison Avenue agency as their chief copywriter. He later moved to Popular Science, finding that he enjoyed the work so much he lost track of why he originally took the job.[4]
Some years later, Pohl returned to For Some We Loved. In early 1950, he read through the original manuscript, but found the writing to be completely unsalvageable; he burned it, and decided to forget the idea. The following year, he began drafting a science fiction novel, loosely themed on advertising, under the name of Fall Campaign, and had reached twenty thousand words by the summer, working at weekends and in the evenings. At this point, Pohl's old friend Cyril Kornbluth arrived, having quit his job in Chicago to freelance as a science fiction writer, and offered to look over the manuscript. A short while later he returned, having incorporated some plot suggestions made by Philip Klass and written a new twenty-thousand word middle section; the two men collaborated on the final third, and after Pohl gave it a final revision, the novel was complete.[5]


### Publication
Horace Gold, the editor of Galaxy Science Fiction, had read the draft before Kornbluth had become involved, and offered to print it when it was complete, tentatively scheduled to follow Alfred Bester's The Demolished Man. In the event, it was serialised in the magazine from June to August 1952, as Gravy Planet.[6]
However, finding a publisher for the novel itself was not easy. Pohl offered it to every American publishing house which printed science fiction, without any success. Eventually, he met Ian Ballantine, an old colleague of his wife's, who had just founded Ballantine Books and was looking for new titles. Ballantine agreed to publish it—Pohl joked that "he was just too inexperienced to know that it was no good"—and it was released in May 1953 in simultaneous paperback and hardcover editions.[7] The book edition dropped the previously published concluding chapters, reportedly added for the magazine version at the request of Galaxy editor H.L. Gold.[8][9]
Twenty-five years after first publication, writing in The Way The Future Was, Pohl estimated that it had sold perhaps ten million copies in twenty-five languages.[10] Pohl's 2011 light revision of the novel includes references to some commercial phenomena in the Reagan–Bush era, including Enron and AIG.
In 2012, it was included in the Library of America omnibus American Science Fiction: Four Classic Novels 1953–1956, edited by Gary K. Wolfe. The omnibus was part of a two-volume set of 1950s science fiction, the first LOA project to include an extensive online companion site.[11]


### Critical reception
In his study of the pioneers of science fiction, New Maps of Hell (1960), the novelist Kingsley Amis states that The Space Merchants "has many claims to being the best science-fiction novel so far."[12] It is also ahead of its time in stressing the importance of limiting population growth and conserving natural resources. On its initial publication, Groff Conklin called the novel "perhaps the best science fiction satire since Brave New World."[9] Boucher and McComas praised it as "bitter, satiric, exciting [and] easily one of the major works of logical extrapolation in several years.... a sharp melodrama of power-conflict and revolt which manages... to explore all the implied developments of [its imagined] society."[13] Imagination reviewer Mark Reinsberg described it as "a marvellously entertaining story" and "A brilliant future satire."[14] P. Schuyler Miller compared the novel to Brave New World, finding it "not so brilliant, but more consistently worked out and suffering principally... from its concessions to melodrama."[15] At the 1976 MidAmeriCon convention in Kansas City, Alfred Bester referred to the novel as "one of the top two science fiction novels of all time."[16]
It was rated the 24th "all-time best novel" in a 1975 Locus poll, jointly with The Martian Chronicles and The War of the Worlds.[17] In 2012, the novel was included in the Library of America two-volume boxed set American Science Fiction: Nine Classic Novels of the 1950s, edited by Gary K. Wolfe.[18] The novel was also included in David Pringle's list of 100 best science fiction novels.[19]
As with many significant works of science fiction, it was lexically inventive. The novel is cited by the Oxford English Dictionary as the first recorded source for several new words, including "soyaburger", "moon suit", "tri-di" for "three-dimensional", "R and D" for "research and development", "sucker-trap" for a shop aimed at gullible tourists, and one of the first uses of "muzak" as a generic term. It is also cited as the first incidence of "survey" as a verb meaning to carry out a poll.[20]
The Space Merchants has also been praised for its investigation of themes relating to 'prosumption', and the impact of overconsumption. Critic Mike Ryder (2022) argues that one of the most significant themes is the ‘robotization’ of producers and consumers, such that the very nature of humanity itself comes into question.[21]


### Adaptations
The film rights were sold for $50,000, though an adaptation was never made. It was adapted for radio by the CBS Radio Workshop.[22]
The novel was followed in 1984 by a sequel, The Merchants' War; as Kornbluth had died in 1958, it was written solely by Pohl.


## References
^ "Publication Listing". isfdb.org. Retrieved April 13, 2015.
^ "Books Published Today". The New York Times: 19. May 18, 1953.
^ Pohl, p. 152
^ Pohl, pp. 170-176
^ Pohl, pp. 199-201
^ Internet Science Fiction Database; Pohl, p. 201
^ Internet Science Fiction Database; Pohl, pp. 202-205
^ Rich, M. (2009). C.M. Kornbluth: The Life and Works of a Science Fiction Visionary. McFarland, Incorporated Publishers. p. 196. ISBN 9780786457113. Retrieved April 13, 2015.
^ a b "Galaxy's 5 Star Shelf", Galaxy Science Fiction, June 1953, p.114
^ Pohl, pp. 201-202
^ Itzkoff, Dave (July 13, 2012). "Classic Sci-Fi Novels Get Futuristic Enhancements From Library of America". The New York Times.
^ Kingsley Amis: New Maps of Hell, p. 124.
^ "Recommended Reading," F&SF, July 1953, p. 85.
^ "Imagination Science Fiction Library", Imagination, December 1953, p.145
^ "The Reference Library", Astounding Science Fiction, November 1953, pp.148-49
^ FANAC Fan History (August 26, 2016). "MidAmeriCon (1976) Worldcon - Alfred Bester interview". Archived from the original on December 14, 2021 – via YouTube.
^ Internet Science Fiction Database
^ Dave Itzkoff (July 13, 2012). "Classic Sci-Fi Novels Get Futuristic Enhancements from Library of America". Arts Beat: The Culture at Large. The New York Times. Retrieved January 9, 2013.
^ "David Pringle's Science Fiction: The 100 Best Novels". Retrieved June 20, 2015.
^ Entries for relevant terms in the Oxford English Dictionary Online, accessed 26 November 2009.
^ Ryder, Mike (2022). "Lessons from science fiction: Frederik Pohl and the robot prosumer". Journal of Consumer Culture. 22 (1): 246–263. doi:10.1177/1469540520944228.
^ Pohl, p. 201. A copy of the broadcast is available at archive.org


## Sources
Pohl, Frederik (1982). The Way The Future Was : a memoir. Granada. ISBN 0-586-05211-9.
Amis, Kingsley (1960). New Maps of Hell : a survey of science fiction. Harcourt, Brace.


## External links
The Space Merchants title listing at the Internet Speculative Fiction Database
The Space Merchants (serialized in Galaxy as Gravy Planet), parts 1, 2, and 3, at the Internet Archive
Review by Jo Walton
Study guide by Richard D. Erlich
Appreciation by Michael Dirda
v
t
e
Undersea Quest (1954)
Undersea Fleet (1956)
Undersea City (1958)
Gateway (1977)
Beyond the Blue Event Horizon (1980)
Heechee Rendezvous (1984)
The Annals of the Heechee (1987)
The Gateway Trip (1990)
The Boy Who Would Live Forever: A Novel of Gateway (2004)
The Other End of Time (1996)
The Siege of Eternity (1997)
The Far Shore of Time (1999)
Man Plus (1976)
Mars Plus (1994) (with Thomas T. Thomas)
Farthest Star (1975)
Wall Around a Star (1983)
The Reefs of Space (1964)
Starchild (1965)
Rogue Star (1969)
The Space Merchants (1953) (with Cyril M. Kornbluth)
The Merchants' War (1984)
Venus, Inc. (1985 Omnibus) (this is a two-in-one volume containing The Space Merchants and The Merchants' War)
Search the Sky (1954) (with Cyril M. Kornbluth)
Gladiator-At-Law (1955) (with Cyril M. Kornbluth)
Preferred Risk (1955) (with Lester del Rey)
Slave Ship (1956)
Presidential Year (1958) (with Cyril M. Kornbluth)
Wolfbane (1959) (with Cyril M. Kornbluth)
Drunkard's Walk (1960)
A Plague of Pythons (1964)
The Age of the Pussyfoot (1965)
Day Million (1970)
The Best of Frederik Pohl (1975)
Jem (1979)
The Cool War (1981)
Syzygy (1981)
Starburst (1982)
The Years of the City (1984)
Black Star Rising (1985)
The Coming of the Quantum Cats (1986)
Terror (1986)
Chernobyl (1987)
Land's End (1988) (with Jack Williamson)
The Day the Martians Came (1988)
Narabedla Ltd. (1988)
Homegoing (1989)
The World at the End of Time (1990)
Outnumbering the Dead (1990)
Stopping at Slowyear (1991)
The Singers of Time (1991) (with Jack Williamson)
Mining the Oort (1992)
The Voices of Heaven (1994)
O Pioneer! (1998)
The Last Theorem (2008) (with Arthur C. Clarke)
All the Lives He Led (2011)


URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ring_Around_the_Sun_(novel)
Content:

Ring Around the Sun is a science fiction novel by American writer Clifford D. Simak. Its anti-urban and pro-agrarian sentiments are typical of much of Simak's work.[1]


## Premise
The novel tells the story of a group of "mutants" with enhanced mental abilities and the ability to move between (apparently all empty) parallel worlds organizing the colonization of those worlds by the population at large. Since this requires uprooting the colonists, and thoroughly disrupting the social structure of the Earth, Earth's current power structure resists fiercely even as it is undermined by the introduction of disruptive devices and everlasting goods, such as the so-called Forever Car, at ridiculously low prices.[2]


## Reception
Science fiction editors Anthony Boucher and J. Francis McComas described the novel as "solid entertainment...with plenty of startling plot-twists and some new ammunition for an old argument."[3] New York Times reviewer Villiers Gerson praised Ring Around the Sun as "quietly written, intricately plotted...[deriving] most of its impact from its author's skillful understatement.[4] P. Schuyler Miller, however, faulted its complicated plot, finding it more "involved" than memorable.[5]
Writers Brian Aldiss and David Wingrove went so far as to call it "Clifford Simak's best book," ranking it alongside Simak's best-known novel, City.[6]


## Publication history
Ring Around the Sun was first published as a serial in Galaxy Science Fiction in from December 1952 to February 1953. It was printed in book form later that year. It has been subsequently reprinted multiple times and translated into several different languages.[7][8]


## Referenced in
Stephen King's Hearts In Atlantis


## References
^ Clute, John. "Simak, Clifford D". Gollancz.
^ Ewald, Robert J (2006). When the Fires Burn High and the Wind Is from the North: The Pastoral Science Fiction of Clifford D. Simak. Wildside Press LLC. pp. 74–77. ISBN 1-55742-218-4.
^ Boucher, Anthony; McComas, J. Francis (June 1953). "Recommended Reading". The Magazine of Fantasy & Science Fiction. p. 70. Retrieved July 30, 2025.
^ "Spaceman's Realm", The New York Times, 14 June 1953.
^ "The Reference Library", Astounding Science Fiction, April 1954, pp.146
^ Aldiss & Wingrove, Trillion Year Spree, Victor Gollancz, 1986, pp.295, 404
^ Clute, John. "Simak, Clifford D". Gollancz.
^ "Bibliography: Ring Around the Sun". Al von Ruff.


## External links
Ring Around the Sun as serialized in Galaxy, parts 1, 2, and 3 at the Internet Archive
Ring Around the Sun title listing at the Internet Speculative Fiction Database
v
t
e
The Creator (1946)
Cosmic Engineers (1950)
Time and Again (1951)
City (1952)
Ring Around the Sun (1953)
Time is the Simplest Thing (1961)
Way Station (1963)
All Flesh is Grass (1965)
The Werewolf Principle (1967)
Why Call Them Back from Heaven? (1967)
The Goblin Reservation (1968)
Shakespeare's Planet (1976)
The Visitors (1980)
Project Pope (1981)


URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/More_Than_Human
Content:

More Than Human is a 1953 science fiction fix-up novel by American writer Theodore Sturgeon. It is a revision and expansion of his 1952 novella Baby Is Three, which is bracketed by two additional parts written for the novel, "The Fabulous Idiot" and "Morality".[2] It won the 1954 International Fantasy Award, which was also given to works in science fiction. It was additionally nominated in 2004 for a "Retro Hugo" award for the year 1954. Science fiction critic and editor David Pringle included it in his book Science Fiction: The 100 Best Novels.
Simon & Schuster published a graphic novel version of More Than Human in 1979.


## Plot introduction
The novel concerns the coming together of six extraordinary people with strange powers who are able to "blesh" (a portmanteau of "blend" and "mesh") their abilities together. In this way, they are able to act as one organism. They progress toward a mature gestalt consciousness, called the Homo gestalt, the next step in human evolution.


## Plot summary
The first part of the novel, The Fabulous Idiot, narrates the birth of the gestalt through the perspective of a number of characters. The story starts with an unnamed man referred to as the "Idiot", who is 25 years old and homeless. He knows he can make people do what he wants them to, but can barely speak and has never experienced real human connection. One day he encounters Evelyn Kew, an innocent girl completely sheltered in an isolated house by her domineering, religious father. They connect telepathically and Lone attempts to enter her family's compound. Evelyn's father finds out about the relationship and kills Evelyn; the idiot then pushes him to kill himself. These events traumatize Evelyn's older sister Alicia, who is later introduced to more conventional society and struggles to fit in there.
During this incident, the idiot barely survives a beating from the father; bleeding and nearly dead, he is found and then adopted by the Prodds, a poor farming couple, and lives with them for about seven years. During this time he learns to speak and takes the name Lone, which Prodd takes to be his name when the Idiot attempts to say the word "alone." When Mrs. Prodd becomes pregnant, fulfilling the couple's desire to have a child, they are about to ask Lone to leave. However, Lone can perceive their intentions and he makes his departure appear to be his own idea. Lone builds a shelter in the forest and is soon joined by three runaway children: Janie, an eight-year-old with a telekinetic gift, and the twins Bonnie and Beanie, who cannot speak properly but possess the ability to teleport. Lone returns to the farm to find Mrs. Prodd has died after giving birth to a "Mongoloid" baby. Altering Prodd's memories so that he thinks his wife is on a trip and they never had a child, Lone adopts the baby, who has a phenomenal mental capacity and thinks almost like a computer. Together, Lone, Janie, the twins and Baby form what will be later called the Homo gestalt. Prodd continues trying to farm, but his old truck is always getting stuck in the mud. When Lone asks Baby for a solution, Baby helps Lone build an anti-gravity generator. He installs it in Prodd's truck, only to find that Prodd has left for Pennsylvania, believing his wife is there.
The second part of the novel is Baby Is Three, which occurs several years after The Fabulous Idiot. Gerry Thompson, a street urchin who has grown up in abusive institutions, is possibly sociopathic. He consults a psychiatrist, trying to piece his memory back together. Gerry ran away from an orphanage and was taken in by Lone. They lived in a refurbished cave until they found the abandoned Kew house. Lone was killed in an accident and Gerry subsequently became the leader of the gestalt. Prior to his death, Lone instructed the children to seek out Alicia Kew, now a spinster living alone with a maid. In her urban house, they were educated and fed under her care. Soon, however, Gerry came to feel that domestication and normalization had weakened their gestalt. He killed Alicia, and the group returned to living alone in the woods. His amnesia was caused by Alicia's having accidentally transmitted her memories to his mind when they first met, triggered by her strong emotional reaction to hearing the words "Baby is three". He learned about her entire life, including her past relationship with Lone, in a split second. After being helped by the psychiatrist, Gerry erases the man's memory of him. However, Gerry remains troubled by the psychiatrist's questions about morality.
The third and concluding part of the novel is Morality. Again, it occurs several years after the previous part. Janie, now an adult, befriends a man with amnesia and helps him regain his health. He slowly remembers what had happened. Seven years earlier, he was Lt. Hippocrates "Hip" Barrows, a gifted engineer who worked for the US Air Force until the incident which led to his incarceration, first in an insane asylum, then in jail. He had discovered some odd effects on an anti-aircraft range. Practice shells fired in a certain area were all duds. Barrows did magnetic tests and finally discovers the anti-gravity machine. It was still operational and attached to Prodd's truck, left abandoned in the field of the now-abandoned farm, which had been absorbed into the range. Gerry knows of Hip's investigation and poses as a common soldier assisting Hip. When they find the truck, Gerry turns the generator all the way up, sending the truck into the sky and preventing Hip from retrieving it. He then mentally attacks Hip to make him look insane, driving him to a mental breakdown and amnesia. Gerry does this because Baby informed him of the consequences (if the anti-grav was discovered, it would lead either to a terrible war or to the complete collapse of the world economy) and that such a major thing will surely be traced back to the gestalt. Aided by Janie, Hip regains his memory, and they go to the isolated Kew house, where the gestalt is now living again. Gerry attempts to attack Hip again. Instead, he finds Hip prepared for this moment, imagining in his mind a code of morality. This teaches Gerry shame, something he has never felt before, and he is humbled. Hip prepares to leave, but Janie convinces him to stay and become the gestalt's conscience. As a result of this completion, the gestalt is telepathically greeted by and welcomed into the pre-existing community of other gestalts around the world, causing Gerry to realize they weren't the only one after all. At the conclusion, Gerry:
He saw himself as an atom and his gestalt as a molecule. He saw these others as a cell among cells, and he saw in the whole the design of what, with joy, humanity would become. He felt a rising, choking sense of worship, and recognized it for what it has always been for mankind―self-respect.


## Reception
New York Times reviewer Villiers Gerson placed the novel among its year's best, praising it for "a poetic, moving prose and a deeply examined raison d'etre."[3] Groff Conklin described More Than Human as "a masterpiece of invention... written in an unmannered prose that still has a poetic, panchromatic individuality."[4] Boucher and McComas praised it for "its crystal-clear prose, its intense human warmth and its depth of psychological probing" as well as its "adroit plotting and ceaseless surge of action," finding it "one of the most impressive proofs yet of the possibility of science fiction as a part of mainstream literature."[5] P. Schuyler Miller praised the novel as among the year's best, saying that Sturgeon "has Bradbury's poetry and style without ever running thin."[6] Writing in the Hartford Courant, reviewer R. W. Wallace praised More Than Human, saying "In its psychological wisdom and its deep humanity this novel is one of the finest achievements of science fiction."[7] In his "Books" column for F&SF, Damon Knight selected Sturgeon's novel as one of the 10 best sf books of the 1950s.[8]
Writing in 1975, R. D. Mullen declared that in More Than Human, "[Sturgeon] had a theme well suited to his talents and inclinations, [and] the result is a book that pretty well avoids the mawkishness that mars most of his work. This book is not a masterpiece, but it comes pretty close."[9] Aldiss and Wingrove found that the novel "transcends its own terms and becomes Sturgeon's greatest statement of one of his obsessive themes, loneliness and how to cure it."[10] In 2012, the novel was included in the Library of America two-volume boxed set American Science Fiction: Nine Classic Novels of the 1950s, edited by Gary K. Wolfe.[11]


## Comics adaptation
In 1978, in collaboration with packager Byron Preiss Visual Publications, Heavy Metal magazine published a three-part comics adaptation of More Than Human. The script was adapted by writer Doug Moench and illustrated by Alex Niño. The story was initially serialized in Heavy Metal magazine vol. 2, issues #2 (June 1978), #3 (July 1978), and #4 (August 1978). A trade paperback collection of the adaptation was co-published in 1979 by HM Communications (the parent company of Heavy Metal Metal) and Simon & Schuster as Heavy Metal Presents Theodore Sturgeon's More Than Human; it featured an introduction by Sturgeon himself.[12]


## References
^ "Books Published Today". The New York Times: 23. November 16, 1953.
^ Theodore Sturgeon, as quoted in the "Baby is Three" story notes, The Complete Stories, vol VI
^ "Spaceman's Realm", The New York Times Book Review, November 22, 1953, p.34
^ "Galaxy's 5 Star Shelf", Galaxy Science Fiction, March 1954, p.118-19
^ "Recommended Reading," F&SF, February 1954, p.93.
^ "The Reference Library", Astounding Science Fiction, June 1954, p.141-42
^ "Time and Space", Hartford Courant, February 7, 1954, p.SM19
^ "Books", F&SF, April 1960, p.99
^ "Reviews: November 1975", Science Fiction Studies, November 1975
^ Aldiss & Wingrove, Trillion Year Spree, Victor Gollancz, 1986, p.293
^ Dave Itzkoff (July 13, 2012). "Classic Sci-Fi Novels Get Futuristic Enhancements from Library of America". Arts Beat: The Culture at Large. The New York Times. Retrieved January 9, 2013.
^ "Heavy Metal Presents Theodore Sturgeon's More Than Human (1979)". Grand Comics Database. Retrieved May 30, 2025.


## External links
"Baby Is Three" at the Internet Archive
Review at SF Site
More Than Human by Theodore Sturgeon, reviewed by Ted Gioia (Conceptual Fiction)
Analysis of More Than Human on Lit React
v
t
e
The Dreaming Jewels
More Than Human
The Cosmic Rape
Venus Plus X
Some of Your Blood
Godbody
The King and Four Queens
Voyage to the Bottom of the Sea
The Rare Breed
I, Libertine
Without Sorcery
E Pluribus Unicorn
Baby Is Three (novella)
"Helix the Cat"
"If All Men Were Brothers, Would You Let One Marry Your Sister?"
"It!"
"Killdozer!"
"The Man Who Lost the Sea"
"Microcosmic God"
"The Pod in the Barrier"
"A Saucer of Loneliness"
"Shottle Bop"
"Slow Sculpture"
"The World Well Lost"
"Shore Leave"
"Amok Time"
Theodore Sturgeon Award
Sturgeon's law


URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mission_of_Gravity
Content:

Mission of Gravity is a science fiction novel by American writer Hal Clement. The novel was serialized in Astounding Science Fiction magazine in April–July 1953. Its first hardcover book publication was in 1954, and it was first published as a paperback book in 1958. Along with the novel, many editions (and most recent editions) of the book also include "Whirligig World", an essay by Clement on creating the planet Mesklin that was first published in the June 1953 Astounding.
Clement published three sequels: a 1970 novel called Star Light, a 1973 short story called "Lecture Demonstration", and a 2000 short story, "Under". Mission of Gravity was nominated for a "Retro-Hugo" Award for the year 1954.


## Setting
The story is set on a very rapidly rotating highly oblate planet named Mesklin; its "day" is just under 18 minutes long, and its surface gravity varies between 700 g at the poles and 3 g at its equator. The story is told from the points of view of one of the local intelligent life forms and a human explorer. The locals are centipede-like, in order to withstand the enormous gravity, and terrified of even small heights, because in 700 g, even a tiny fall is fatal.


## Plot summary
The native protagonist, Barlennan, captain of the sailing raft Bree, is on a trading expedition to the equator. Prior to the story's opening, a human scientific rocket has become stranded at one of the planet's poles, where the gravity is too strong to effect a rescue. A member of the scientific team, Charles Lackland, is dispatched to the equator where he has met Barlennan by chance. Even machine aided, Lackland is barely able to function in the 3 g environment, one Barlennan considers incredibly light and a tiny fraction of what his culture is used to.
Lackland teaches the Bree crew English and arranges a deal with Barlennan; in exchange for the humans providing warnings of the violent weather which often plagues trips to the pole, Barlennan will help retrieve the recorded information from the rocket. Communication is achieved through an audio-visual radio built to function in a high-gravity environment, which is treated as magical by other intelligences encountered on the planet.
Along the way to the pole, the ship encounters and overcomes a variety of obstacles, some of which the humans help with using their superior scientific knowledge, and some of which rely on the cunning of Barlennan and his crew. They are captured by various lifeforms similar to themselves, but who live in the lower-gravity areas and have developed projectile weapons and gliders. Gradually, with human help, they gain an understanding of these and manage to escape.
Barlennan has been dissatisfied with the humans' efforts to seemingly avoid explanation of anything scientific, and almost withholds the rocket when they finally reach it; but the humans convince them that a scientific background is needed to understand the advanced equipment, and a deal is reached whereby the humans will educate the Mesklinites.
The novel provides an exposition on how the weather, geology and atmosphere of the seas and the pole are affected by the local conditions, and sees the Mesklinites overcoming their fear of gravity as they learn to view it scientifically, eventually harnessing aerodynamics to make the Bree fly at the poles.


## Reception
Mission was the runner-up for the 1955 International Fantasy Award for fiction.[1] Boucher and McComas found Mission "compact and unified, with a good deal of adventurous excitement" and characterized it as "a splendid specimen of science fiction in the grandest of grand manners."[2]
Wayne Barlowe illustrated the Mesklinites in his Barlowe's Guide to Extraterrestrials.[3]


## Reputation
The story is “noteworthy not only as an impressive piece of planet-building, but as the first SF novel built on actual observational data involving another possible solar system”,[4]: 170 making it an early and often-praised example of macrocosmic worldbuilding hard science fiction.[5] Although Clement has stated that his original calculations concerning the polar gravity of Mesklin were inaccurate — he later estimated the polar gravity should have been approximately 250 g instead of 700 — the exploration of what existence might be like in such extreme conditions is detailed, convincing, and persuasive. The novel is frequently invoked in discussions of the sense of wonder, the sensation of dawning comprehension and understanding of a larger context for a given experience, that many readers of science fiction point to as the reason why they pursue the genre.
The personalities of Clement's alien characters have been criticized as being "too human" or not "alien enough", as failing to be, in the words of John W. Campbell "something that thinks as well as a man, but not like a man".


## Analysis
Neil Barron identified the story as displaying several characteristics of the classical epics such as beginning in medias res and a divine intervention of sorts by the assistance provided to the Mesklinites by the human character Lackland.[6]: 1427–1428


## References
^ Hugo Nominees 1955, by Jo Walton; published October 31, 2010; retrieved August 21, 2016
^ "Recommended Reading," F&SF, June 1954, p.70.
^ Barlowe, Wayne Douglas; Summers, Ian; Meacham, Beth (1987) [1979]. "Mesklinite". Barlowe's Guide to Extraterrestrials: Great Aliens from Science Fiction Literature (2nd ed.). pp. 62–63. ISBN 0-89480-500-2.
^ Westfahl, Gary (July 1993). "'The Closely Reasoned Technological Story': The Critical History of Hard Science Fiction". Science Fiction Studies. 20 (2): 157–175. ISSN 0091-7729. JSTOR 4240246. Archived from the original on September 12, 2024. Retrieved September 29, 2024.
^ Steble, Janez. (2014). Novi val v znanstveni fantastiki ali eksplozija žanra New wave in science fiction or the explosion of the genre : doktorska disertacija. [J. Steble]. OCLC 898669235.
^ Barron, Neil (1979). "Mission of Gravity". In Magill, Frank N. (ed.). Survey of Science Fiction Literature: Five Hundred 2,000-Word Essay Reviews of World-Famous Science Fiction Novels With 2,500 Bibliographical References. Vol. 3: Imp – Nin. Salem Press. pp. 1424–1428. ISBN 978-0-89356-194-9.


## Further reading
Allen, L. David (1974) [1973]. "Mission of Gravity, Hal Clement (1954)". Science Fiction Reader's Guide. Centennial Press. pp. 103–111. ISBN 978-0-8220-1611-3.
Hassler, Donald M. (1982). "The Irony in Hal Clement's World Building". In Wolfe, Gary K. (ed.). Science Fiction Dialogues. Academy Chicago Publishers. pp. 85–92. ISBN 978-0-89733-067-1.
Westfahl, Gary (1996). "'Like Something Living': Hal Clement's Mission of Gravity". Cosmic Engineers: A Study of Hard Science Fiction. Greenwood Press. pp. 83–95. ISBN 978-0-313-29727-4.


## External links
Mission of Gravity title listing at the Internet Speculative Fiction Database
"Whirligig World" title listing at the Internet Speculative Fiction Database
v
t
e
Needle (1950)
Iceworld (1953)
Mission of Gravity (1954)
The Ranger Boys in Space (1956)
Cycle of Fire (1957)
Close to Critical (1958)
Natives of Space (1965)
Small Changes (1969)
Star Light (1971)
Ocean on Top (1973)
Left of Africa (1976)
Through the Eye of a Needle (1978)
The Best of Hal Clement (1979)
The Nitrogen Fix (1980)
Intuit (1987)
Still River (1987)
Fossil (1993)
Half Life (1999)
Noise (2003)


URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/A_Mirror_for_Observers
Content:

A Mirror for Observers is a science fiction novel by American writer Edgar Pangborn, winner of the International Fantasy Award in 1955.[1] The plot concerns a philosophical conflict between settlers from Mars who attempt to influence human development.


## Publication history
The novel was originally published in hardcover by Doubleday in 1954, with a British hardcover following from Frederick Muller Ltd in 1955. The first American paperback was issued by Dell in 1958, the first British paperback by Penguin Books in 1966. Avon Books published a trade paperback edition in 1975. After paperback reissues from several publishers in the 1970s and 1980s, Old Earth Books released a hardcover edition in 2004, and Gollancz included the novel in its SF Gateway line in 2011. Mirror has been translated into French, German, Italian, and Dutch.[2]


## Plot summary
A Mirror for Observers recounts the story of Angelo Pontevecchio, a child prodigy and "potential ethical innovator" caught between two contesting factions of Martians, Observers and Abdicators. The Martians, living secretly on Earth after evacuating their dying home world, have been trying to guide the development of human civilization for thousands of years.[3] The novel is told from the point of view of Elmis, Angelo's designated Martian guardian, who must shield him from the malignant Abdicators.[4]


## Reception
Boucher and McComas praised the novel, saying "The warmth, depth and perception of a true novelist have given wholly new life to the shopworn [premise]; and the fallible humanity of Pangborn's Martian Observers (from whose viewpoint the story is told) removes this from the paranoid Superman category and makes it a distinguished and moving novel of people [and] their common problems of free will".[5] Groff Conklin declared A Mirror for Observers a "beautiful and moving book, saying that "Despite the bigness of the theme, the story is told in little details which make the tragedy all the more impressive." He noted, however, that the book was "more like a preliminary sketch of a much larger-scope novel than it actually is".[6] P. Schuyler Miller described the story as "that oldest of gags, the 'aliens among us' gambit, done as it's never been done before and is unlikely to be done again".[7]
New Worlds reviewer Leslie Flood complimented the British edition as "a book which has given me as much pleasure to read as any other in the past", citing "the tender commiseration for humanity and the understanding objectivity of Elmis himself".[4]
John Clute found the novel successful, saying that "Pangborn's gracious literacy usually overcomes a tendency towards a cloying sententiousness.[3] Gardner Dozois described it as "somewhat dated now, but still powerful".[8] Jo Walton termed Mirror "deservedly a classic", saying "It’s the mood that I remember and that brings me back to it, the Martians and the humans, the tensions, the sense of time".[9]


## References
^ Locus Index to SF Awards Archived October 16, 2012, at the Wayback Machine
^ ISFDB publishing history
^ a b "Pangborn, Edgar", The Encyclopedia of Science Fiction
^ a b "Book Reviews", New Worlds, October 1955, pp. 122-23
^ "Recommended Reading," F&SF, May 1954, p.72.
^ "Galaxy's 5 Star Shelf", Galaxy Science Fiction, June 1954, p.119
^ "The Reference Library", Astounding Science Fiction, September 1954, p.149
^ Explorers: SF Adventures to Far Horizons, 2000
^ Quiet Martians


URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_End_of_Eternity
Content:

The End of Eternity is a 1955 science fiction novel by Isaac Asimov with mystery and thriller elements on the subjects of time travel and social engineering. Its ultimate premise is that of a causal loop, a type of temporal paradox in which events and their causes form a loop. The novel was shortlisted for the Hugo Award for Best Novel.
In The End of Eternity, members of a time-changing organization called Eternity, known as "Eternals", seek to ensure that the conditions that led to Eternity's founding occur as history says that they occurred. At the end of the novel, the protagonist Andrew Harlan is placed in a situation in which he must decide whether to allow the "circle" to close and Eternity to be founded, or to allow the opposite to happen and prevent Eternity from having ever existed.
Many years later, Asimov tied this novel into his broader Foundation Series by hinting in Foundation's Edge that it is set in a universe where Eternity had existed, but was destroyed by Eternals, leading to an all-human galaxy. In the last chapter of The End of Eternity, Noÿs mentions hopes of a Galactic Empire.


## Plot
In the future, humanity uses time travel to create Eternity, an organization "outside time" that aimed to improve human happiness by observing human history and, after careful analysis, directly making small actions that cause "reality changes". It also established trade between the various centuries to help those most in need. Its members, known as "Eternals", prioritize the reduction of human suffering at the cost of a loss to technology, art, and other endeavors, which are prevented from existing as a consequence of reality changes. Those enlisted travel "upwhen" and "downwhen" and re-enter time in devices called "kettles". They are unable to travel to times before the 27th century, when the temporal field powering Eternity was established, the limit being known as the "downwhen terminus". Also, the future of humanity's fate is unknown since Earth is empty by the year 15 million (the 150,000th century, or the 15,000th millennium), but that is preceded by a period called the Hidden Centuries, or the Void Millennia, from the years 7 million to 15 million (the 70,000th to the 150,000th centuries or 7,000th to the 15,000th millennia) in which, for unknown reasons, they cannot access the world outside Eternity to learn more.
Andrew Harlan is an Eternal and an outstanding Technician, a specialist at implementing reality changes, who is fascinated by the Primitive times before the downwhen terminus. Senior Computer Laban Twissell, the Dean of the Allwhen Council, instructs Harlan to teach a newcomer, Brinsley Sheridan Cooper, about the Primitive. Meanwhile, Harlan is also tasked by Assistant Computer Finge to spend a week in the 482nd century. He stays with Noÿs Lambent, a non-Eternal member of the period's aristocracy and falls in love with her. However, he discovers that a reality change will affect the century, and wishing to preserve Noÿs as she is, he breaks Eternal law, removes her from time, and hides her in the empty sections of Eternity that exist in the Hidden Centuries.
Harlan later finds that the kettles will not travel to the time in which he hid Noÿs because of a mysterious block at the 100,000th century (the year 10 million). He confronts Finge with a weapon and accuses him of sabotaging matters out of jealousy, but Finge states that he reported Harlan's conduct and denies placing the block. Harlan is summoned to the council but is not reprimanded. He deduces that because his transgressions were ignored, he must be there to serve a larger purpose. Harlan confronts Twissell and explains that he has been teaching himself temporal mathematics and believes that its 23rd-century inventor, Vikkor Mallansohn, must have been helped in his discovery by someone from his future. He concludes that his current role is training Cooper to do so. Twissell confirms that and adds that unknown to Cooper, Mallansohn's secret memoirs show that Cooper is the famous inventor Mallansohn. That must be kept from Cooper so that Eternity will be founded as it historically was. Harlan blackmails Twissell by threatening to destroy Cooper's ignorance unless Noÿs is returned, but he is outwitted. Twissell locks him in the control room with all controls deactivated other than the lever to send Cooper back, which matches the memoirs' statement that to have been there was his role. Harlan, enraged, breaks open the controls and changes the power output, which causes Cooper to be sent back to an unknown time, estimated to be in the early 20th century.
Twissell is aghast, but as Eternity still exists, he theorizes that it is possible to undo Harlan's damage and send Cooper back correctly for his mission. They think that Cooper might try to communicate by using an advertisement in one of Harlan's Primitive magazines, which would stand out only to an Eternal. Harlan finds that a magazine from 1932 has changed and now shows an advertisement in the form of a mushroom cloud, which no human could have known of in 1932. The first letters in the ad's four lines, "All the Talk Of the Market", spell out ATOM. However, Harlan refuses to tell Twissell about the advertisement until they bring Noÿs back from the Hidden Centuries, but Twissell insists that the block that Harlan encountered is theoretically impossible. As the two travel far upwhen to get her, Twissell speculates that the Hidden Centuries are a time in which humans evolved into something greater, do not want to be meddled with, and so blocked off Eternity's access to time from the 70,000th to the 150,000th century. He supposes that when Harlan inhabited an Eternity outpost in the Hidden Centuries with Noÿs, those future humans may have worried that Eternity was beginning an invasion, which led them to retaliate with a kettle block at the 100,000th century to prevent any more encroachments. However, Harlan and Twissell pass the 100,000th century unhindered and find Noÿs. Harlan then agrees to travel downwhen and to bring back Cooper so that he can be sent to the correct time for his mission, but only if Noÿs comes with him.
On arrival in 1932, Harlan holds Noÿs at gunpoint and reveals that he suspects her of being from the Hidden Centuries and that he has brought her so that she could not harm Eternity. Noÿs acknowledges that she is from that time and explains that her people have also developed time travel, but their method shows many possible futures, rather than just the single future seen by Eternity. They learned that humans would have been the first species to spread into the galaxy, but in each future in which Eternity existed, safety was given a priority, and by the time that humans had reached the stars, other species predominated and prevented them. As a result, humanity would become depressed and gradually die out. Noÿs's mission was to make the minimum change to history to remedy that by preventing Eternity from ever being founded. There were multiple ways of achieving that, and she chose an approach in which she and Harlan were together. Noÿs gives Harlan the choice of killing her and preserving Eternity or letting her live and allowing a different future to arise. Harlan, remembering the unhealthy interpersonal relationships between the Eternals and the sociological damage that he has seen to be done to people whose original "homewhen" had ceased to exist, agrees with her. His resolution causes a reality change to occur, and the kettle disappears, indicating that Eternity now never happened. The book ends by stating that it was "the end of Eternity – and the beginning of Infinity".


## Concepts
Physio-time: Relative time elapsed as perceived by an Eternal
Eternity: An organization outside normal time involved in changing history
Eternals: Member of Eternity. They do not live forever and are recruited as young men from regular time.
Homewhen: The original time of an Eternal
Upwhen: Moving forward in time or referring to a relative future
Downwhen: Moving backward in time or referring to a relative past
Kettle: Device for moving forward ("upwhen") or backward ("downwhen") in time
Minimum Necessary Change (M.N.C.): The smallest possible change that will restore or create the desired future (see also Butterfly effect)


## Major characters
Andrew Harlan: An outstanding Technician, a member of Eternity who is responsible for implementing reality changes. He is appointed as Twissell's personal Technician. The real reason is later revealed to be that the memoirs of the Temporal Field inventor Vikkor Mallansohn that describe him as having that role and being responsible for training the Cub, Brinsley Cooper. Therefore, Harlan is given those tasks so that the "circle is completed," history happens as it has happened, and Eternity is established as it was.
Laban Twissell: Senior Computer and dean of the Allwhen Council, which is responsible for ensuring the events of Mallansohn's memoirs occur as described.
Hobbe Finge: Assistant Computer, who greatly dislikes and distrusts Harlan.
Noÿs Lambent: a human from the Hidden Centuries, who is first introduced as a non-Eternal member of the aristocracy from the 482nd century and is officially Finge's secretary. Her actual mission, unknown to any Eternals, is to destroy Eternity by preventing it from being founded for the eventual benefit of humanity.
Vikkor Mallansohn / Brinsley Sheridan Cooper (the Cub): Mallansohn develops the Temporal Field in the 24th century to lead to the founding of Eternity in the 27th century. He leaves a time-sealed memoir behind, which reveals that the person universally known as Vikkor Mallansohn of the 24th century was actually a Cub called Brinsley Sheridan Cooper, who was mentored by Harlan and sent back in time to teach Mallansohn the temporal field equations. After Mallansohn dies in an accident prior to the mission's completion, Cooper had taken on Mallansohn's name undetected to complete his life's work and ensure that Eternity would be founded despite the death. Cooper is unaware that will happen when he is found by Twissell living in the 78th century and is trained to be sent back in time.


## Origins
In December 1953, Asimov was thumbing through a copy of the 28 March 1932 issue of Time and noticed what looked, at first glance, like a drawing of the mushroom cloud of a nuclear explosion. A closer look showed him that the drawing was actually a geyser, the Old Faithful. However, he began pondering the question of what the implications would be if there had been a drawing of a mushroom cloud in a magazine from 1932, and he eventually came up with the plot of a time travel story. He began the story, The End of Eternity, on 7 December 1953, and he finished it on 6 February 1954, when it was 25,000 words long. Asimov submitted the story to Galaxy Science Fiction, and within days, he received a call from Galaxy editor Horace L. Gold that rejected the story. Asimov decided to turn the story into a novel, and on March 17, he left it with Walter I. Bradbury, the science fiction editor at Doubleday, to get his opinion. Bradbury was receptive, and by April 7, Asimov had been informed that a contract for the novel was in the works. Asimov began expanding the story and eventually delivered the novel version to Bradbury on December 13. Doubleday accepted the novel, which was published in August 1955.
The novel reflects the state of scientific knowledge of its time, some of which has been superseded. For instance, the power source for the time travelers is referred to as "Nova Sol", and a link to the far future taps the energy of the exploding Sun. Scientists now know that the Sun is far too small to explode.
As may be seen below, the novel may also be counted as the prequel to the Empire series of novels, which form part of the Foundation Series. Asimov had already included a kind of time travel in his 1950 novel Pebble in the Sky, but it was a one-way trip.
The original End of Eternity appeared in 1986 in a collection called The Alternate Asimovs.


## Reception
The book was highly acclaimed by critics. The New York Times reviewer Villiers Gerson praised the novel by stating it "has suspense on every page" and "exhibits in every chapter the plot twists for which the author is famous."[2] In a 1972 review, Lester del Rey declared that no one "has wrung so much out of... or has developed all the possibilities of paradox."[3]
As noted by the critic Susan Young,[4] John Crowley's award-winning 1989 novella "Great Work of Time" has the same basic outline as The End of Eternity, a secret society of well-meaning time travelers bent on remodeling history and a young man recruited into the society to make a specific change that would bring the society itself into being. The details of what the time travelers do and when in time they operate are very different from those in Asimov's book. However, in both books, the society's operations come to a halt through the influence of people from the future for reasons that have to do with the existence of that future. Young also notes a similarity with Poul Anderson's The Corridors of Time, which also depicts a complex society of time travelers who find sections of the future inaccessible; also in Anderson's book, the intervention of the people of that further future plays a pivotal and cataclysmic role in the plot.
Charles Stross has stated that his 2009 novella Palimpsest is effectively a rewrite of The End of Eternity.[5]
There are also similarities to John Brunner's Times Without Number, which was originally published in 1962 and revised for re-publication in 1969. However, in that story, the time-policing organization struggles in vain to prevent its own annihilation; the conclusion is that timelines in which time travel arises are unstable and cannot sustain their existence.


## Role inFoundationseries
As written, The End of Eternity suggests that the new reality is the one that leads onto the Galactic Empire and Foundation but does not confirm it. The mechanism of time travel is most likely not the one stumbled across in Pebble in the Sky because of Harlan's words about the energy requirement for the Temporal Field. The "neuronic whip" from The Currents of Space and other stories in the "Empire" future is also found in The End of Eternity, again as something that had to be removed from reality. There are also no aliens to compete with humans: in "Blind Alley", the aliens' predicament is rather like what will overtake humanity if Eternity is not prevented.
The original unpublished End of Eternity is clearly a different future from that of the Foundation, but Asimov says in his story-postscript that he had some idea of a bridge in the published version.[6]
Asimov placed a hint in Foundation's Edge, many years later, that the Eternals might have been responsible for the all-human galaxy and the development of humanity on Earth of the Foundation Series,[7] but that interpretation is disputed. Asimov himself mentions the disparity.[8] The human-like robots may have been intended to play a part.[9]
According to Alasdair Wilkins, in a discussion posted on Gizmodo, "Asimov absolutely loves weird, elliptical structures. All three of his non-robot/Foundation science fiction novels — The End of Eternity, The Gods Themselves, and Nemesis — leaned heavily on non-chronological narratives, and he does it with gusto in The Gods Themselves."


## Translations
The End of Eternity has been translated into over 25 languages. The Russian translation, first edition 1966, was heavily censored because of both sexual references and sociological discussions that were unacceptable to Soviet ideology.
For some time, The End of Eternity was out of print, but that was remedied with Tor Books' 2011 hardcover reissue and a recent move to various e-book formats.[10]


## Adaptations
Loki (TV series) (2021), Marvel Cinematic Universe, Michael Waldron Though it's a different story, the television series written by Michael Waldron heavily borrowed ideas such as the bureaucratic structure of Eternity (renamed to TVA) and preserving a single Reality (renamed to The Sacred Timeline).
Though it's a different story, the television series written by Michael Waldron heavily borrowed ideas such as the bureaucratic structure of Eternity (renamed to TVA) and preserving a single Reality (renamed to The Sacred Timeline).
A halhatatlanság halála (1977), a TV movie directed by András Rajnai A television film based on the book, entitled A halhatatlanság halála (literally The Death of Immortality) was made in Hungary in 1976. The screenwriter and director was András Rajnai, and the main character was played by Jácint Juhász.[11]
A television film based on the book, entitled A halhatatlanság halála (literally The Death of Immortality) was made in Hungary in 1976. The screenwriter and director was András Rajnai, and the main character was played by Jácint Juhász.[11]
The End of Eternity (1987), a film directed by Andrei Yermash It mostly follows the novel except for the ending. The novel ends with both Noÿs and Harlan deciding that the suppression of spaceflight by Eternity is not in the interest of humankind, and they live "happily ever after." In the Soviet film, the ending takes place in the mid-1980s Germany, rather than 1932 Los Angeles. Noÿs never fully describes why she wants Eternity destroyed, but in the middle of the movie, before her true identity is revealed, she gives some idea. Harlan yells at her that he is but a pawn in things and storms off, and there is a strong implication that he and Noÿs have no further contact. Then, a scene shows Harlan observing both Twissell and Finge in 1980s clothing getting out of a Rolls-Royce and walking together. The implication is that Twissel and Finge use Harlan as a pawn to further their own materialistic gains. While out of step with the rest of the film as well as the novel, the ending follows the Soviet concept that the "everyman" (Harlan) is frequently manipulated by the bourgeoisie as a pawn to its own ends. The film ends with a long shot of Harlan walking away alone from the camera down a highway.
It mostly follows the novel except for the ending.
The novel ends with both Noÿs and Harlan deciding that the suppression of spaceflight by Eternity is not in the interest of humankind, and they live "happily ever after."
In the Soviet film, the ending takes place in the mid-1980s Germany, rather than 1932 Los Angeles. Noÿs never fully describes why she wants Eternity destroyed, but in the middle of the movie, before her true identity is revealed, she gives some idea. Harlan yells at her that he is but a pawn in things and storms off, and there is a strong implication that he and Noÿs have no further contact. Then, a scene shows Harlan observing both Twissell and Finge in 1980s clothing getting out of a Rolls-Royce and walking together. The implication is that Twissel and Finge use Harlan as a pawn to further their own materialistic gains.
While out of step with the rest of the film as well as the novel, the ending follows the Soviet concept that the "everyman" (Harlan) is frequently manipulated by the bourgeoisie as a pawn to its own ends. The film ends with a long shot of Harlan walking away alone from the camera down a highway.
In 2008, New Regency acquired the rights to the novel for a possible film adaptation.[12]
Novels portal


## References
^ "Publication Listing".
^ Villiers Gerson (23 October 1955). "In the realm of the spaceman". The New York Times Book Review. p. 30.
^ "Reading Room". If. April 1, 1972. pp. 119–120.
^ Young, Susan F. "Well-meaning do-gooders and time-travel paradoxes". In Edward Bell (ed.). The Sociology of Science Fiction.
^ Stross, Charles (April 12, 2011). "Last time I did this, I lied". Stross's official blog. Retrieved December 26, 2014. If you could re-write one sci-fi (or fantasy) classic, which one would you choose, and why?" "for what it's worth, I've already done it a couple of times, deliberately or accidentally. (I didn't re-read The End of Eternity before writing Palimpsest, for example)
^ In the novel... I wanted to tie it somehow with earlier books of mine dealing with the rise and fall of the Galactic Empire" (The Alternate Asimovs).
^ "The fable states that there were those who could step out of time and examine the endless strands of potential reality. These people were called the Eternals and when they were out of time they were said to be in Eternity. It was their task to choose a Reality that would be most suitable to humanity. They modified endlessly—and the story goes into great detail. Eventually they found (so it is said) a Universe in which Earth was the only planet in the entire Galaxy on which could be found a complex ecological system, together with the development of an intelligent species capable of working out a high technology" (Foundation's Edge, Chapter 74).
^ "If you wish an account of the Eternals and the way on which they adjusted human history, you will find it (not entirely consistent with the references in the new book) in The End of Eternity ("Afterword" in Foundation's Edge)".
^ "Therefore, it is said, it was the robots who established Eternity somehow and became the Eternals. They located a Reality in which they felt that human beings could be as secure as possible—alone in the Galaxy. Then... the robots of their own accord ceased to function" (Foundation's Edge, Chapter 74).
^ "Isaac Asimov, time travel and The End of Eternity". April 1, 2011. Retrieved July 18, 2018.
^ A halhatatlanság halála (video). Hungary. 1976. Archived from the original on June 19, 2014.
^ "Asimov's The End of Eternity follows Foundation adaptation". Sffmedia.com. Archived from the original on August 13, 2009. Retrieved February 20, 2014.


## Sources
Tuck, Donald H. (1974). The Encyclopedia of Science Fiction and Fantasy. Chicago: Advent. p. 21. ISBN 0-911682-20-1.


## External links
The End of Eternity title listing at the Internet Speculative Fiction Database
The End of Eternity at Open Library
Isaac Asimov at IMDb
v
t
e
The Positronic Man
The Caves of Steel
The Naked Sun
The Robots of Dawn
Robots and Empire
The Stars, Like Dust
The Currents of Space
Pebble in the Sky
Foundation
Foundation and Empire
Second Foundation
Foundation's Edge
Foundation and Earth
Prelude to Foundation
Forward the Foundation
David Starr, Space Ranger
Lucky Starr and the Pirates of the Asteroids
Lucky Starr and the Oceans of Venus
Lucky Starr and the Big Sun of Mercury
Lucky Starr and the Moons of Jupiter
Lucky Starr and the Rings of Saturn
Norby, the Mixed-Up Robot
Norby's Other Secret
Norby and the Lost Princess
Norby and the Invaders
Norby and the Queen's Necklace
Norby Finds a Villain
Norby Down to Earth
Norby and Yobo's Great Adventure
Norby and the Oldest Dragon
Norby and the Court Jester
The End of Eternity
Fantastic Voyage
The Gods Themselves
Fantastic Voyage II: Destination Brain
Nemesis
Nightfall
Child of Time
The Death Dealers
Murder at the ABA


URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Long_Tomorrow_(novel)
Content:

The Long Tomorrow is a post-apocalyptic science fiction novel by American writer Leigh Brackett, originally published by Doubleday & Company, Inc in 1955. Set in the aftermath of a nuclear war, it portrays a world where scientific knowledge is feared and restricted. It was nominated for a Hugo Award in 1956.


## Plot summary
In the aftermath of a devastating nuclear war, Americans have come to blame technology for the disaster, and far from seeking to recover what was destroyed, are actively opposed to any such attempt. Religious sects which even before the war opposed modern technology have adjusted to the post-apocalypse situation far more easily than anyone else, and have come to dominate the post-war society. All the pre-war American cities have been destroyed in the war, and their re-construction is expressly forbidden. The US Constitution has been amended, with the Thirtieth Amendment disallowing the presence of more than a thousand residents or the existence of more than two hundred buildings per square mile anywhere in the United States.
Len Colter and his cousin Esau are adolescent members of the New Mennonite community of Piper's Run. Against their fathers' wishes, the boys attend a preaching where a trader named Soames is stoned to death for his apparent involvement with a forbidden bastion of technology known as Bartorstown. They are saved when a trader, Ed Hostetter, intervenes. Hostetter grabs a box from Soames' wagon, from which Esau steals a radio. Though sickened by the stoning and harshly punished by their fathers, Len and Esau are fascinated by the idea of a community that secretly still harnesses the forbidden technologies. Len's grandmother, a little girl at the time of the destruction, sparks his interest in the technological past with her stories of big, brightly lit cities and little boxes with moving pictures.
Esau and Len begin to work the radio, trying to make 'noise' come out of it. Esau steals three books from the schoolhouse in the hope that they would teach the boys to utilise the radio. The two are punished harshly after Hostetter outs them as thieves. The radio is smashed by Esau's father in rage, and Hostetter demands his wagon be searched lest he be accused of being a member of Bartorstown. Esau is whipped and Len's father is visibly disappointed. Subsequently, Esau and Len become determined to find their way to the fabled Bartorstown and leave Piper's Run in search of it, following broken dialogue heard over the radio towards a river.
The boys make their way to a town called Refuge, living with Judge Taylor and his family and working for a warehouse owner, Mike Dulinsky. Esau starts a romantic relationship with the judge's daughter, Amity Taylor. Dulinsky wants to build a fifth warehouse to compete economically with the town on the other side of the river, Shadwell. However, this would violate the Constitution's Thirtieth Amendment as the number of buildings would exceed two hundred. He rallies the Refuge residents, who initially pledge their support, but Judge Taylor warns Len and Dulinsky of the consequences and that he would go to the state authority. The Judge eventually betrays Dulinsky to the Shadwell residents. The Shadwell residents double-cross the Judge, kill Dulinsky and set fire to Refuge.
Len, Esau and Amity are saved by Hostetter, who is revealed to be an actual member of Bartorstown. Previously, he had to out Esau as a thief to conceal his own identity. Len is let down when Hostetter's ship turns out to be a coal-powered steamship, though eventually understanding it was for concealment. Hostetter wishes to settle in a place like Piper's Run, but is unable to do so. They make a long journey to Bartorstown, a place called Fall Creek Canyon. Hostetter remarks that even those who set foot in Bartorstown do not know it is the Bartorstown, as the scientific facilities were buried, and Fall Creek Canyon resembles any ordinary settlement. Before the journey is complete, Len begins to think of Hostetter as a father-figure, the latter reciprocating that sentiment.
In Fall Creek, Amity and Esau are wed, while the three are sworn to secrecy and are told they will be shot if they attempt to leave. The town's leaders seek to use the childlike vision that Len and Esau had of Bartorstown to inspire the workers, who have been working for a long time without an end in sight. Len becomes romantically tangled with Joan Wepplo, who possesses a red dress. Joan, in contrast to Len, has resented her upbringing in Bartorstown and seeks to leave, though the residents of Bartorstown are unable to.
The scientists of Bartorstown have been working on a long-term project with an artificial intelligence, Clementine, aimed at creating a forcefield that would eradicate the splitting of atoms, preventing future misuse of nuclear technology. They feed Clementine equations in the hope of creating the ultimate equation to produce the forcefield. Len is shocked to find that Bartorstown relies on nuclear power, conflicting with his religious beliefs that the devilish nuclear power which annihilated society should be abstained from entirely. The community's rationalisation that others would eventually unlock the lost secrets of nuclear technology and that it would be better to take preventive measures does not sit well with Len and his religious upbringing.
Len and Joan, now married, plot an escape from Bartorstown, and the two succeed, blending in with tribals to evade Bartorstown's surveillance. Len's journey is painful and he thinks of the long walk back to Piper's Run as his religious redemption. However, they are tracked down by Hostetter. The three sit together in a small town where a preaching is occurring, in similar circumstances where Soames was stoned. Len mentally prepares for himself to die, thinking of Soames and Dulinsky and the disillusioned Bartorstown scientists and acknowledging that change would come around eventually, even if he as an individual passed on. Len gives up the opportunity to out Hostetter as a Bartorstown member to the crowd to be stoned, and Hostetter reciprocates by not outing Len. Hostetter is revealed to have armed backup that would have shot Len and Joan if he had outed Hostetter, but Hostetter reiterates that he knew and trusted Len so long that he never would have needed the backup. Hostetter, Len and Joan then make their way back to Bartorstown.


## Critical reception
Damon Knight wrote of the novel:[1]
Unhappily, as the story progresses, it seems more and more to support Koestler's assertion that literature and science fiction cancel each other out. Most of the book, particularly the early part, is compellingly written, but not speculative... as the invented elements of the story grow more important, the vision dims... This novel illustrates a problem which science fiction writers are going to have to solve before long: how to write honestly about a mildly speculative future without dragging in pseudoscientific props by the cartload.
Writing in The New York Times, J. Francis McComas described The Long Tomorrow as "Brackett's best novel to date [and] awfully close to being a great work of science fiction". He declared that "Brackett has written a moving but always objective account of the ever-recurring clash between action and reaction in human thought and feeling".[2] Galaxy reviewer Floyd C. Gale praised the novel as a "powerful and sensitive opus".[3] In 2012 the novel was included in the Library of America two-volume boxed set American Science Fiction: Nine Classic Novels of the 1950s, edited by Gary K. Wolfe.[4] That July, io9 included the book on its list of "10 Science Fiction Novels You Pretend to Have Read".[5]


## See also
1955 in science fiction
List of nuclear holocaust fiction


## References
^ Knight, Damon (1967). In Search of Wonder. Chicago: Advent.
^ "In the Realm of the Spaceman", The New York Times Book Review, October 23, 1955, p.30
^ "Galaxy's 5 Star Shelf", Galaxy Science Fiction, March 1955, p.97
^ Dave Itzkoff (July 13, 2012). "Classic Sci-Fi Novels Get Futuristic Enhancements from Library of America". Arts Beat: The Culture at Large. The New York Times. Retrieved January 9, 2013.
^ Anders, Charlie Jane (July 10, 2012). "10 Science Fiction Novels You Pretend to Have Read (And Why You Should Actually Read Them)". io9. Archived from the original on October 14, 2014. Retrieved June 5, 2013.


URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Inheritors_(William_Golding)
Content:

The Inheritors is a work of prehistoric fiction[1] and the second novel by the British author William Golding, best known for his first novel, Lord of the Flies (1954). It concerns the extinction of one of the last remaining tribes of Neanderthals at the hands of the more sophisticated Homo sapiens. It was published by Faber and Faber in 1955.


## Background
Like Lord of the Flies, The Inheritors began life in a Bishop Wordsworth's School notebook.[2] This handwritten manuscript and the typescript that ensued are now held in the University of Exeter's Special Collections Archives, where they can be used for further research and study.
Golding began work on The Inheritors in the autumn of 1954, mere weeks after the publication of Lord of the Flies; Golding was concerned that he would be unable to write another novel[3] and had sent a 'long, anxious letter in return' to his editor Charles Monteith when asked what his next publication would be.[4] He had started writing a novel exploring the father-son relationship through the mythical character of Telegonus (son of Odysseus), titled In Search of My Father, a year prior; Monteith requested a chapter, the typescript for which demonstrates 'some of Golding's most spectacular prose'.[5] Monteith was 'enormously interested',[6] but after favourable reviews of Lord of the Flies, it was left unfinished owing to Golding's belief that it would come off as a cheap imitation of other historical epics.[7]
Golding finished his first draft of The Inheritors on 11 November 1954, though he deemed his own handwriting illegible and worked on the novel significantly over Christmas, redrafting, reworking, and typing the manuscript to submit to Monteith.[8] The following February, Monteith received the revised typescript along with a letter from Golding featuring a host of disclaimers that betrayed his nervousness surrounding the novel that would follow up Lord of the Flies.[9] Golding had also wanted to finish the book sooner; after moving house to the Victorian vicarage across the road, his increased rent had made him 'consequently hard up'.[10] But Golding had no reason to worry and, in fact, soon found that the book would be completed more quickly than he had previously anticipated; after a few proof readings, Monteith saw that the book was fit to publish.[10] There was little editing required and, although he was initially unsure about having cavemen as the subject of a novel, Monteith knew that the book was a masterpiece that was 'perfect as it stood'.[11]


## Plot
This novel is an imaginative reconstruction of the life of a band of Neanderthals, consisting of an old man (Mal), an unnamed old woman, four adults (Ha, Nil, Lok and Fa), a little girl (Liku) and a baby, simply referred to as "the new one". It is written in such a way that the reader might assume the group to be modern Homo sapiens as they gesture and speak simply among themselves, and bury their dead with heartfelt, solemn rituals. They also have powerful sense impressions and feelings, and appear sometimes to share thoughts in a near-telepathic way. As the novel progresses it becomes more and more apparent that they live very simply, using their considerable mental abilities to connect to one another without extensive vocabulary or the kinds of memories that create culture. They have wide knowledge of food sources, mostly roots and vegetables. They chase hyenas from a larger beast's kill and eat meat, but they don't kill mammals themselves. They have a spiritual system centering on a female principle of bringing forth, but their lives are lived so much in the present that the reader realizes they are very different from us, living in something like an eternal present, or at most a present broken and shaped by seasons.
One of the band, Lok, is a point of view character. He is the one we follow as one by one the adults of the band die or are killed, then the young are stolen by the "new people", a group of early modern humans. Lok and Fa, the remaining adults, are fascinated and repelled by the new people. They observe their actions and rituals with amazement, only slowly understanding that harm is meant by the sticks of the new people.
The humans are portrayed as strange, godlike beings as the Neanderthals witness their mastery of fire, Upper Palaeolithic weaponry and sailing.
All save the last chapters of the novel are written from the Neanderthals' stark, simple stylistic perspective. Their observations of early human behaviour serve as a filter for Golding's exercise in paleoanthropology, in which modern readers will recognize precursors of later human societal constructs, e.g., religion, culture, sacrifice and war.
The penultimate chapter employs an omniscient viewpoint, observing Lok. For the first time, the novel describes the people the reader has been inhabiting through the first-person perspective. Lok, totally alone, gives up in despair.
In the final chapter, we move to the point of view of the new race, more or less modern humans fleeing in their boats, revealing that they are terribly afraid of the Neanderthals (whom they believe to be devils of the forest) and of pretty much everything around. This last chapter, the only one written from the humans' point of view, reinforces the inheritance of the world by the new species.
The fleeing humans carry with them an infant Neanderthal, of whom they are simultaneously afraid and enamoured, hinting at the later hypothesis of inter-breeding between Neanderthals and modern humans.


## Reception
The Inheritors was published on 16 September 1955, when Golding's literary reputation was still in its nascent stages.[12] However, though few in number to begin with, reviews of the book were largely positive: two separate critics—Philip Day from The Sunday Times and Peter Green (who was later a friend of Golding's) from The Daily Telegraph—described the novel as a tour de force,[13] whilst Isabel Quigly called it "a many-dimensional and astonishing book" in The Spectator[14] two weeks after its initial publication, along with similarly positive reviews from myriad newspapers and literary journals. These sat amongst two more negative reviews: one from a leading member of the Communist Party of Great Britain, Margot Heinemann, who found the book hard to understand and disapproved of its allegedly negative portrayal of man's ascension; and one from The Times, that would have preferred it if Neanderthals were the subjects of history books and not fiction.[15]
The novel sold 1,800 copies by 3 October and 3,000 by 28 October.[16] Sales figures of Golding's previous book in America affected American publishers' opinions on the novel, who worried that a novel like The Inheritors would only receive 'ivory-tower appreciation' and consequently chose not to publish it at the time.[17]
In a 2021 review, Ben Okri in the Irish Times admires its invention of the language it uses:
One of the great achievements of the novel is the language in which it is rendered. There is a special quality to the writing. Golding not only invents a world but invests it with a high degree of linguistic intensity. The language owes something to the liberating achievement of James Joyce, Virginia Woolf and stream-of-consciousness. But its achievement is wholly Golding's own.[18]
The book, particularly the last chapter, was the inspiration for the 1976 song "A Trick of the Tail" by British rock band Genesis.[citation needed]


## See also
Neanderthal interaction with Cro-Magnons
Neanderthal extinction hypotheses
The Clan of the Cave Bear, a novel about a Cro-Magnon girl raised by Neanderthals, by Jean M. Auel
Dance of the Tiger, a novel depicting Neanderthal and Cro-Magnon interaction, by paleontologist Björn Kurtén
The Neanderthal Parallax, a trilogy of novels written by Robert J. Sawyer depicting the effects of the opening of a connection between two versions of Earth in different parallel universes: the world familiar to the reader, and another where Neanderthals became the dominant intelligent hominid.


## Citations
^ "Golding, William". SFE: the Encyclopedia of Science Fiction. Retrieved 23 November 2016.
^ "Search Results". lib-archives.ex.ac.uk. Retrieved 29 November 2022.
^ Golding, Judy (16 September 2015). "The Inheritors: the intimate secrets in William Golding's Neanderthal tale". the Guardian. Retrieved 29 November 2022.
^ Carey pg. 170
^ Carey pp. 170-1
^ Monteith qtd. in Carey pg. 172
^ Carey pp. 172-3
^ Carey pp. 173-4
^ Carey p. 176
^ a b Carey p. 177
^ Montieth qtd. in Carey p. 177
^ Carey p. 184
^ Day and Green qtd. in Carey pp. 184–185
^ Quigly qtd. in Carey p. 185
^ Carey p. 185
^ Carey p. 186
^ Carey pp. 188–189
^ Okri, Ben (4 November 2021). "An ancient imagination: Ben Okri on The Inheritors by William Golding". The Irish Times. Retrieved 18 March 2022.


## General sources
Carey, John (2009). William Golding: The Man Who Wrote Lord of the Flies. London: Faber and Faber. ISBN 978-0-571-23163-8.
v
t
e
Poems (1934)
Lord of the Flies (1954)
The Inheritors (1955)
Pincher Martin (1956)
The Brass Butterfly (1958)
Free Fall (1959)
The Spire (1964)
The Hot Gates, and Other Occasional Pieces (1965)
The Pyramid (1967)
The Scorpion God : Three Short Novels (1971)
Darkness Visible (1979)
Rites of Passage (1980)
A Moving Target (1982)
Nobel Lecture, 7 December 1983 (1984)
The Paper Men (1984)
An Egyptian Journal (1985)
Close Quarters (1987)
Fire Down Below (1989)
The Double Tongue (1995)
v
t
e
Homo habilis → Homo erectus (→ Homo antecessor)? → Homo heidelbergensis → Homo neanderthalensis
Anatomy
Behaviour
Genetics
Admixture with H. sapiens
Extinction
Acheulean
Mousterian
Châtelperronian (controversial)
Levallois technique
Gibraltar Neanderthals
Southwest Asian Neanderthals
Miguelón
Saccopastore skulls
Ehringsdorf 9
Altamura 1
La Ferrassie 1 (site)
La Chapelle-aux-Saints 1 (site)
La Quina 5 and 18
Krijn
Scladina
Saccopastore 1 and 2
Altamura man
Mt. Circeo 1
Krapina Neanderthal site
Shanidar 1-4
Teshik-Tash 1
Kebara 2 (site)
Tabun C1
Amud 1 and 7 (site)
OR-1
Neanderthal 1 (site)
Spy 1 and 2
Engis 2 (site)
Sidrón remains
Gibraltar 1 and 2 (site)
Saint-Césaire 1
Le Moustier
Fontéchevade
Mezmaiskaya 1
Bontnewydd tooth
Atapuerca
Samu
Azykhantrop
Peștera cu Oase
Lagar Velho 1
Homo erectus
Denisovan
Homo floresiensis
Homo naledi
Homo sapiens
Excavation sites
Neanderthal Museum
Neanderthal genome project (In Search of Lost Genomes)
The Quest for Fire (film)
The Grisly Folk
The Neanderthal Man
The Inheritors
The Ugly Little Boy
Neanderthal Planet
Dance of the Tiger
Earth's Children (film)
Neanderthal
The Neanderthal Parallax
Prehistoric Autopsy


URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Stars_My_Destination
Content:

The Stars My Destination is a science fiction novel by American writer Alfred Bester. It was first published in book form in the United Kingdom in June 1956, where it was titled Tiger! Tiger!; the novel was named after William Blake's 1794 poem "The Tyger", whose first verse is printed as the first page of the novel.[3] The novel remains widely known under that title in the markets in which this edition was circulated. It was subsequently serialized in the American Galaxy Science Fiction magazine in four parts, beginning in October 1956.[4] A working title was Hell's My Destination; the book was also associated with the name The Burning Spear. It was Bester's last novel for the next 19 years.[5]
The novel was widely criticized and praised when it first appeared, but it is now appreciated as a classic work and a prescient forerunner of the cyberpunk science fiction subgenre.


## Premise
In the 24th or 25th century (depending on the edition of the book), humans have colonized the Solar System and also learned to teleport (although not through outer space). It tells the story of Gulliver ("Gully") Foyle, driven by and transformed by, a thirst for vengeance.


## Plot
At the time when the book is set, "jaunting"—personal teleportation—has so upset the social and economic balance that the Inner Planets are at war with the Outer Satellites. Gully Foyle of the Presteign-owned merchant spaceship Nomad—an uneducated, unskilled, unambitious man whose life is at a dead end—is marooned in space when the ship is attacked. After six months of waiting, a passing spaceship, the Vorga, also owned by the powerful Presteign industrial clan, ignores his signal and abandons him. Foyle is enraged and is transformed into a man consumed by revenge, the first of many transformations.
Foyle repairs the ship and barely survives but is found and adopted by a cargo cult in the Asteroid Belt who tattoo a hideous mask of a tiger on his face and force-marry him to one of their girls. He recovers his health, escapes and is returned to Terra. His attempt to blow up the Vorga fails, and he is captured by Presteign. Unknown to Foyle, the Nomad was carrying "PyrE", a new material which could make the difference between victory and defeat in the war. Presteign hires security agent Saul Dagenham to interrogate Foyle, to find the ship and PyrE.
Protected by his revenge fixation, Foyle cannot be broken and he is put into a jaunte-proof prison. There he meets Jisbella McQueen, who teaches him to think clearly and tells him he should find out who gave the order not to rescue him. Together they escape and get his tattoos removed—but not with total success: the subcutaneous scars become visible again whenever Foyle becomes too emotional. The pair travel to the Nomad, where they salvage not only PyrE, but also a fortune in platinum metal. Jisbella is captured by Dagenham, but Foyle escapes.
Some time later, Foyle re-emerges as "Geoffrey Fourmyle", a nouveau riche dandy. Foyle has rigorously educated himself and had his body altered to become a killing machine. Through yoga, he has achieved the emotional self-control necessary to prevent his tattooed stigmata from showing. He seeks out Robin Wednesbury, a one-way telepath, whom he had raped[6] [citation needed] earlier in the novel, and persuades her to help him charm his way through high society. Foyle tracks down the crew of the Vorga to learn the identity of the ship's captain but each person he finds has been implanted with a death-reflex and dies when questioned. Each time, Foyle is tormented by the reappearance of "The Burning Man", a vision of him on fire.
At a society party, Foyle is smitten with Presteign's daughter Olivia. He also meets Jisbella again—now Dagenham's lover—who chooses not to reveal Foyle's identity, although Dagenham has realized it (Foyle's alias was implanted in his subconscious mind during Dagenham's interrogation). During a nuclear attack by the Outer Satellites, Foyle goes to Olivia to save her. She tells him that to have her, he must be as cruel and ruthless as she is. Robin, traumatized by the attacks, tries to buy her way out of her arrangement with Foyle by revealing the name of another Vorga crew member. Foyle agrees, but reneges and asks Robin to help him to earn Olivia's favours. Robin, who had feelings for Foyle all the time, gets jealous and goes to Central Intelligence to betray him.
Foyle learns that the captain of the Vorga has joined a Scoptsy cult on Mars and has had all her sensory nerves disabled, making her immune to conventional torture. Foyle kidnaps a telepath to interrogate the captain and learns that the ship did not rescue him because it was picking up refugees, taking their belongings and ejecting them into space. He also learns that the captain was Olivia Presteign. Now she rescues him from Martian commandos, as she sees in Foyle someone who can match her hatred and need to destroy.
Driven by a guilty conscience, Foyle tries to give himself up to Presteign's lawyer, Regis Sheffield, who is known as a Terran patriot. Sheffield turns out to be a spy for the Outer Satellites and he captures Foyle. Sheffield tells Foyle that when the Nomad was attacked, Foyle was taken off the ship, transported 600,000 miles and set adrift in a spacesuit to be a decoy to attract ships to be ambushed. Instead, Foyle had space-jaunted—teleporting a cosmic distance, very much further than had been previously believed possible—back to the Nomad. Now, the Outer Satellites not only want PyrE, they want Foyle to learn the secret of space-jaunting, and they are ready to use extreme measures.
Presteign reveals that PyrE is activated by telepathy and Robin is enlisted to trigger it to flush out Foyle. Bits of PyrE left exposed by Foyle's tests to determine its purpose cause destruction worldwide but primarily at Foyle's abandoned encampment in St. Patrick's Cathedral, where Sheffield has brought him. The church partially collapses, killing Sheffield and trapping Foyle, unconscious but alive, over a pit of flame. Suffering from synesthesia brought on by the explosion affecting his neurological implants, Foyle jauntes through space and time as "The Burning Man". Finally he lands in the future, where Robin (now married to Yeovil) telepathically tells him how to escape from the collapsing cathedral.
Back in the present, Foyle is pressured by Presteign, Y'ang-Yeovil, and Dagenham to surrender the rest of his cache of PyrE, which had been protected from exploding by its Inert Lead Isotope container, and to teach mankind how to space-jaunte. He leads them to where the rest of the PyrE is hidden but makes off with it and jauntes across the globe, throwing slugs of PyrE into the crowd at each stop. He asks humanity to choose: either destroy itself or follow him into space. Foyle realizes the key to space-jaunting is faith, not the certainty of an answer but the conviction that somewhere an answer exists. He jauntes from one nearby star to another, finding new worlds suitable for colonization, but reachable only if he shares the secret of space-jaunting. He comes to rest back with the cargo cult, where the people see him as a holy man and await his revelation.


## The novel


### Composition
The novel was outlined by Bester while he was living in Britain, and actually written mainly when he was living in Rome.[citation needed] The project had its origins[citation needed] in a newspaper clipping (or possibly a National Geographic article) that Bester read about Poon Lim, a shipwrecked World War II sailor on a raft, stranded in the South Atlantic. He had drifted un-rescued in the Atlantic for a world record 133 days, because passing ships thought he was a lure to bring them within torpedo range of a hidden submarine. From there grew the story of the antihero Gully Foyle, seeking revenge for his abandonment and causing havoc all about him: a future-set retelling of Alexandre Dumas' The Count of Monte Cristo.
Like Edmond Dantès in The Count of Monte Cristo, Foyle is thrown into prison, in this case the supposedly jaunte-proof Gouffre Martel located in caverns. He establishes a clandestine connection to another prisoner, Jisbella McQueen, and through her he is educated to the point where he can conceive a plan to escape and exact his revenge. Escaping with her and locating the wreck of the Nomad, he uses its treasure, as Dantès did, to reinvent himself as Geoffrey Fourmyle.
Bester once wrote that he used playful narration at one point to grab the reader's attention.[citation needed]


### Publication and reception
First published in book form in the UK in June 1956 as Tiger! Tiger!, The Stars My Destination was subsequently serialized in Galaxy, where The Demolished Man had also appeared. It ran in four parts (October 1956 through January 1957), then was published in the US later in 1957.
The novel has often featured in lists of the best science fiction novels of all time.[citation needed]


### Influence on cyberpunk
The novel has been described as proto-cyberpunk, predating the literary movement by over two decades.[7][8][9] Specifically, the novel features megacorporations as powerful as governments, a dark overall vision of the future, and the cybernetic enhancement of the body.[citation needed]


## Allusions
The name of Charles Fort Jaunte, who discovers teleportation, derives from Charles Fort, a writer principally of nonfiction, who coined the term "teleportation".[citation needed]
The title "The Stars My Destination" appears in a quatrain quoted by Foyle twice during the book. The first time, while he is trapped in outer space, he states:
Gully Foyle is my name
And Terra is my nation.
Deep space is my dwelling place,
And death's my destination.
Toward the end of the novel, after he has returned to human life and become something of a hero, he states:
Gully Foyle is my name
And Terra is my nation.
Deep space is my dwelling place,
The stars my destination.
Both quatrains are based on a poetic form that was popular in England and the United States during the 18th-to-mid-20th centuries, in which a person stated their name, country, city or town, and a religious homily (often, "Heaven's my destination") within the rhyming four-line structure (see book rhyme).[10] This literary device had been previously used by James Joyce in A Portrait of the Artist as a Young Man and M.R. James in A Warning to the Curious.
Bester may have come across his title expression in the writings of John Whiteside Parsons, one of the fathers of modern rocketry, who was also a science fiction fan and occultist. In 1943, Parsons wrote: "Rocketry may not be my True Will, but it's one hell of a powerful drive. With Thelema as my goal and the stars my destination and my home, I have set my eyes on high".[11]
Bester's initial work on the book began in England, and he took the names for his characters from a UK telephone directory. As a result, many of the characters are named after British or Irish towns or other features:[3] Gulliver Foyle (and his pseudonym, Fourmyle of Ceres), Robin Wednesbury, the Presteign clan, Regis Sheffield, Y'ang-Yeovil, Saul Dagenham, Sam Quatt, Rodger Kempsey, the Bo'ness and Uig ship underwriters.[12]


## Characters
Gulliver ("Gully") Foyle: Last remaining survivor of the merchant spaceship Nomad. Captured by the "Scientific People" on an asteroid, only his face is tattooed according to their customs. The tattoos are later painfully removed, but the scarred patterns left under his skin become visible whenever his emotions flare out of control.
Presteign: Head of the wealthy Presteign clan, whose interests include a chain of luxury department stores, each managed by an identical "Mr. Presto". Wealthy people like Presteign demonstrate their status by using outmoded methods of transportation and never jaunting if they can avoid it. Presteign holds court in his Star Chamber, an elaborate, old-fashioned office equipped with a bar and staffed by robots. It is designed to disorient visitors and give him the psychological edge.
Robin Wednesbury: A Black woman, a Telesend, a one-way telepath who can send thoughts but not receive them. Foyle meets her in "jaunte rehab" while pretending to be someone who has lost the ability to jaunte. She discovers his deception, but he kidnaps her and rapes her to intimidate her into silence. Later, as Fourmyle, he recruits her to help him navigate the upper echelons of society. After she discovers who he really is, he offers her the prospect of finding her family, who were refugees aboard the Vorga.
Jisbella ("Jiz") McQueen: A rebellious woman, serving five years of "cure" in Gouffre Martel for larceny, she turned to crime to rebel against the limitations imposed on women to "protect" them in a world where everyone can teleport. She escapes with Foyle and takes him to a criminal doctor who is able to bleach out his facial tattoos by applying a chemical with a tattoo needle. The process is agony for Foyle, but Jisbella makes him endure it out of her disgust for him.
Saul Dagenham: The head of a private "special services" agency contracted by Presteign to interrogate Gully Foyle and force him to reveal the location of the derelict Nomad. Dagenham was a nuclear scientist who became radioactive in an accident. He cannot remain in a room with other people for more than a short time.
The agents of "Dagenham Couriers Inc.": A bizarre collection of freaks who specialize in "FFCC", or "Fun, Fantasy, Confusion, and Catastrophe" to carry out their missions of theft, kidnapping, and espionage.
Peter Y'ang-Yeovil: Head of a government Central Intelligence agency based on ancient Chinese principles who is also trying to find Nomad. He is "a member of the dreaded Society of Paper Men, and an adept of the Tsientsin Image Makers". Although of Chinese descent and able to speak fluent Mandarin, he does not look Chinese.
Olivia Presteign: Daughter of Presteign, she is an albino who is blind to visible light, but can see in the infrared spectrum and some radio waves. Like Jisbella, she too is in revolt against her treatment as a woman, and also as a genetic anomaly. Her rebellion takes the form of interplanetary smuggling of refugees. It was on one such mission that she ordered her ship Vorga to ignore the distress calls from Nomad.
Regis Sheffield: A high-priced lawyer working for Presteign, he is actually an agent of the Outer Satellites coalition.
"Bunny": Sheffield's personal secretary, apparently Chinese, he speaks Mandarin with difficulty and is said to resemble a frightened rabbit, hence his nickname.


## Speculative science
The novel included some early descriptions of proto-science and fictional technology, among them Bester's portrayal of psionics,[13] including the phenomenon of "jaunting", named after the scientist (Charles Fort Jaunte) who discovered it. Jaunting is the instantaneous teleportation of one's body (and anything one is wearing or carrying). One is able to move up to a thousand miles by just thinking.
Jaunting has other effects on the social fabric of the novel's world, and these are examined in true science-fictional fashion. Women of the upper classes are locked away in jaunte-proof rooms "for their protection", the treatment of criminals of necessity goes back to the Victorian "separate system", and freaks and monsters abound.
The second significant technology in the novel is the rare substance known as "PyrE", an extremely powerful explosive which is activated by telepathy. Possession of PyrE and knowledge of the means to detonate it is believed by both sides to be key to winning the interplanetary war.
Bester's description of synesthesia is the first popular account published in the English language and is also quite accurate.[14]


## Reception and influence
Initially, reviews of The Stars My Destination were mixed. The well-regarded science fiction writer and critic Damon Knight, in In Search of Wonder (1956), wrote of the novel's "bad taste, inconsistency, irrationality, and downright factual errors", but called the ending of the book "grotesquely moving".[15] In a profile of Bester for Continuum Encyclopedia of American Literature (2005), critic Steven H. Gale cited the novel as a reflection of the author's maturation, addressing as it does "the continued evolution of humankind as a species", a grander theme than those treated with in his earlier work. Gale declared the novel to be Bester's most stylistically ambitious work, citing the use of disparate fonts to evoke synesthesia, the progressively intelligent language accorded to the maturing protagonist, and the framing of the narrative between the variations on Blake's quatrain.[4]
The book has received high praise from many fellow science fiction writers. After generally criticizing unrealistic science fiction, Carl Sagan in 1978 listed The Stars My Destination as among stories "that are so tautly constructed, so rich in the accommodating details of an unfamiliar society that they sweep me along before I have even a chance to be critical".[16] By 1987, when the author died, "it was apparent that the 1980s genre [cyberpunk] owed an enormous debt to Bester and to this book in particular".[3] Neil Gaiman wrote in the introduction to a 1999 edition of the book: "The Stars My Destination is, after all, the perfect cyberpunk novel: it contains such cheerfully protocyber elements as multinational corporate intrigue; a dangerous, mysterious, hyperscientific MacGuffin (PyrE); an amoral hero; a supercool thief-woman..."[3] James Lovegrove called it "the very best of Bester",[17] and Thomas M. Disch identified it as "one of the great sf novels of the 1950s".[17] Joe Haldeman wrote: "Our field has produced only a few works of actual genius, and this is one of them",[17] who also added that he reads the novel "every two or three years and it still evokes a sense of wonder".
Dave Langford reviewed Tiger! Tiger! for White Dwarf #60 (1984), and stated that "the compulsive, pyrotechnic tale of obsession and revenge needs no introduction (read it!)."[18]
According to Samuel R. Delany, the book is "considered by many to be the greatest single SF novel".[17] while Robert Silverberg wrote that it is "on everybody's list of the ten greatest SF novels".[3] Fantasy writer Michael Moorcock praised it as "a wonderful adventure story" that embodies truly libertarian principles.[19] Ty Franck, co-author of The Expanse series, said: "I don't remember any of the other stories in [A Treasury of Great Science Fiction, Volume Two; an anthology of science fiction stories], and I read that book a dozen times. The only story that sticks out in my mind is The Stars My Destination".[20]
In a 2011 survey asking leading science fiction writers to name their favorite work of the genre, The Stars My Destination was the choice of William Gibson and Moorcock. Gibson remarked that the book was "perfectly surefooted, elegantly pulpy", and "dizzying in its pace and sweep", and a "talisman" for him when undertaking his first novel. Moorcock hailed Bester's novel as a reminder of "why the best science fiction still contains, as in Ballard, vivid imagery and powerful prose coupled to a strong moral vision".[21]
In 2012, the novel was included in the Library of America two-volume boxed set American Science Fiction: Nine Classic Novels of the 1950s, edited by Gary K. Wolfe.[22]


## Adaptations


### Comics
In 1963, Australian comics illustrator Stanley Pitt and his brother Reginald worked on a proposed comic strip adaptation entitled Gully Foyle. Bester looked over the strips and gave his approval. A film company, which held the rights to the novel, apparently put a stop to this. Small circulation publications containing the strips appeared in 1967 and 2001.[citation needed]
A graphic novel adaptation drawn by Howard Chaykin, which utilized the complete text of the original novel was first published, in part, in 1979 by Baronet Publishing. The release of the conclusion was delayed due to Baronet's bankruptcy. The second half was released by Marvel Entertainment's Epic imprint in 1992.[23]


### Radio
A dramatisation titled Tiger! Tiger! was broadcast on BBC Radio 4 on September 14, 1991 and repeated on August 16, 1993. It was scripted by Ivan Benbrook and directed by Andy Jordan. Alun Armstrong played Gully Foyle, Miranda Richardson was Olivia, Siobhan Redmond was Robin Wednesbury and Lesley Manville was Jisbella McQueen.[24]


### Anime
A 2004 anime series, Gankutsuou: The Count of Monte Cristo, was originally intended as an adaptation of The Stars My Destination. The copyright holders' refusal to allow an adaptation led the director, Mahiro Maeda, to instead use The Count of Monte Cristo, which had inspired Bester's story.[25]


### Planned feature film adaptations
As mentioned above, one production company had apparently secured the rights to the novel as early as the 1960s. A number of adaptations of the book have been scripted. So far, none have yet made it to the screen.[26] While the novel has long been considered an "unfilmable" work,[27] the screen rights were acquired by Universal Pictures in 2006[28] and by Paramount Pictures in 2015.[29]
Film adaptations of The Stars My Destination have been frequently rumored. According to David Hughes' Greatest Sci-Fi Movies Never Made, Richard Gere owned the rights to, and wanted to star in, the adaptation following the success of Pretty Woman. At a later point, NeverEnding Story producer Bernd Eichinger had the rights and hired notable comic book artist Neal Adams to produce concept art. Still later, Paul W. S. Anderson was set to direct it, but wound up doing Event Horizon instead. Since then, a number of scripts have been written, but nothing more has happened.[30]


## In popular culture
The Stars My Degradation, an early comic strip by Alan Moore (later with writing assistance from Steve) parodies the "Gully Foyle is my name" rhyme in the first installment.
In Stephen King's Lisey's Story (2006), the title character recalls it as her deceased husband's favorite novel. The short story "The Jaunt" (1981) takes its title from the book, which it names and references it at several points.
Gully Foyle makes a cameo appearance as an agent for the Jurisfiction organisation in the BookWorld of author Jasper Fforde's Thursday Next series. Another novel in the series, The Well of Lost Plots, uses Stars My Destination as the title of a tabloid newspaper in the fictional universe of Emperor Zhark.
The Tomorrow People, a British children's TV series, uses "jaunting" to refer to teleportation.
In the 2000 video game Deus Ex, Gully Foyle is listed as a current resident of the 'Ton Hotel.
Enzo Paulo Gugino, a character from the John Scalzi novel Zoe's Tale wrote a poem entitled "The Stars My Destination" based on "the title from an obscure fantasy adventure book that he'd never read but whose title stayed with him".
In Crooked Little Vein by Warren Ellis, the element PyrE is referenced by Zack Pickles when explaining to protagonist Michael McGill the impact of rebel journalism on society and the power structure of society.
In Death's End by Cixin Liu, the Planetary Defense Council adopts Resolution 479, initiating the Stars Our Destination Project.
Stars My Destination was the title of a year-long story arc in Starman comics.
In the mobile game Tokyo Afterschool Summoners, the lore of the character Nomad is based on the contents of the book, as well as the poem "The Tyger".
Many musical groups, including Stereolab, roadside picnic, NASA Space Universe and Slough Feg reference Gully Foyle and/or the title of the novel. Foyle appears on the cover of Sough Feg's Hardworlder album, along with a song entitled "Tiger! Tiger!".


## References
Notes
^ Whitaker's Cumulative Book List: 62. 1956.{{cite journal}}: CS1 maint: untitled periodical (link)
^ "Books Published Today". The New York Times: 28. March 21, 1957.
^ a b c d e Gaiman, Neil (1999). "Introduction". The Stars My Destination. SF Masterworks. London: Orion Publishing. ISBN 978-1-85798-814-7.
^ a b Gale, Steven H. (2003). "Bester, Alfred". In Serafin, Steven; Bendixen, Alfred (eds.). The Continuum Encyclopedia of American Literature. London: Continuum. pp. 93–95. ISBN 0-8264-1777-9.
^ Kelleghan, Fiona (November 1994). "Hell's My Destination: Imprisonment in the Works of Alfred Bester". Science Fiction Studies. 21, part 3 (64). Retrieved May 14, 2011.
^ Bester, Alfred (2011). The Stars My Destination. p. 41. ISBN 978-1-87696-346-0.
^ Biller, Diana (December 25, 2015). "The Essential Cyberpunk Reading List". io9. Retrieved January 26, 2016. This 1956 novel, originally serialized in four parts in Galaxy magazine, predates the cyberpunk movement by more than twenty years, but nonetheless serves as one of its more important ancestors. With its bleak future, cybernetic body modification, and evil megacorporations, The Stars My Destination set up a number of themes that became central to later cyberpunk works.
^ Hiltzik, Michael (January 1, 2016). "A New Year's list: Five great sci-fi novels to make you forget 'Star Wars'". Los Angeles Times. Retrieved January 26, 2016. Bester is a science fiction master unappreciated by the general reader but known as an important influence on Stephen King and the "cyberpunk" movement; The Stars My Destination frequently turns up on aficionados' lists of the greatest science fiction works of all time.
^ Berthoud, Ella and Susan Elderkin (2013). The Novel Cure. Edinburgh: Canongate. p. W.
^ "Origins: 'Johnson Johnson is my name' A MYSTERY!". Mudcat Café. Mudcat Café Music Foundation. Archived from the original on May 22, 2011. Retrieved October 18, 2009.[unreliable source?]
^ Pendle, George. Strange Angel: The Otherworldly Life of Rocket Scientist John Whiteside Parsons (Orlando, Florida: Mariner Book, 2006). p.169. ISBN 0-15-603179-5
^ Alfred Bester (June 6, 2011). The Stars My Destination. ibooks. p. 75. ISBN 978-1-876963-46-0. the underwriters, Bo'ness and Uig, get the salvage rights
^ Clareson, Thomas (1992). "Science Fiction: The 1950s". Understanding Contemporary American Science Fiction. Columbia: University of South Carolina Press. p. 74. ISBN 0-87249-870-0.
^ Giannini, A.J.; Slaby, A.E.; Giannini, M.C. (1982). Handbook of Overdose and Detoxification Emergencies. New Hyde Park, NY: Medical Examination Publishing. p. 164. ISBN 0-87488-182-X.
^ Knight, Damon (1956). In Search of Wonder. Chicago: Advent. p. 306.
^ Sagan, Carl (May 28, 1978). "Growing up with Science Fiction". The New York Times. p. SM7. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved December 12, 2018.
^ a b c d Bester, Alfred (1999). The Stars My Destination. London: Gollancz. ISBN 978-1-85798-814-7.
^ Langford, Dave (December 1984). "Critical Mass". White Dwarf (60). Games Workshop: 11.
^ Moorcock, Michael. "Starship Stormtroopers Archived December 24, 2002, at the Wayback Machine". Cienfuegos Press Anarchist Review, 1978.
^ Andrew Liptak (May 27, 2015). "Evolution of a Space Epic: James S.A. Corey's The Expanse". The B&N Sci-Fi and Fantasy Blog. Barnes & Noble.
^ "The stars of modern SF pick the best science fiction". The Guardian. May 14, 2011. Retrieved May 14, 2011.
^ Itzkoff, Dave (July 13, 2012). "Classic Sci-Fi Novels Get Futuristic Enhancements from Library of America". New York Times. Arts Beat: The Culture at Large blog. Retrieved January 9, 2013.
^ "The Complete Alfred Bester's The Stars My Destination". September 15, 2012.
^ "The Shape of Things To Come Episode 8 Tiger! Tiger!". Miranda Richardson Radio Appearances. Archived from the original on December 20, 2010. Retrieved January 2, 2009.
^ "Interview: Mahiro Maeda" (in French). Coyote Magazine. January 18, 2016. Archived from the original on August 28, 2016. Retrieved January 27, 2018.
^ "Destination: Development Hell: How Alfred Bester's 'The Stars My Destination' Took a Jaunt to Hollywood" in David Hughes, The Greatest Sci-Fi Movies Never Made. Chicago IL: A Capella Books, 2001, pp. 8-17
^ Ambrose, Tom (November 14, 2008). "Asimov's The End Of Eternity Is Coming". Empire. Bauer Consumer Media. Retrieved May 14, 2011.
^ "U has 'Stars' in its eyes" Variety (March 21, 2006)
^ Busch, Anita (February 27, 2015). "Paramount In Talks To Acquire Rights To Sci-Fi Classic 'The Stars My Destination'". Deadline Hollywood. Retrieved March 1, 2015.
^ Anders, Charlie Jane (August 10, 2012). "100 Wonderful and Terrible Movies That Never Existed". io9. Archived from the original on October 20, 2012. Retrieved October 5, 2012.
Sources
Boucher, Anthony, ed. (1959). "The Stars My Destination by Alfred Bester". A Treasury of Great Science Fiction (Volume Two ed.). Garden City, New York: Doubleday. pp. 361–522, color reference p.465.
Tuck, Donald H. (1974). The Encyclopedia of Science Fiction and Fantasy. Chicago: Advent. p. 43. ISBN 0-911682-20-1.


## External links
The Stars My Destination title listing at the Internet Speculative Fiction Database
The Stars My Destination parts 1, 2, 3, and 4 at the Internet Archive
John Baxter reviews The Stars My Destination at US National Public Radio
The Stars My Destination at Encyclopedia Astronautica
v
t
e
The Demolished Man (1953)
Who He? (1953)
The Stars My Destination (1956)
The Computer Connection (1975)
Golem100 (1980)
The Deceivers (1981)
Tender Loving Rage (1991)
Psychoshop (with Roger Zelazny) (1998)
"Time Is the Traitor" (1953)
"Star Light, Star Bright" (1953)
"5,271,009" (1954)
"Fondly Fahrenheit" (1954)
"The Men Who Murdered Mohammed" (1958)
"The Pi Man" (1959)
"Something Up There Likes Me" (1973)
"The Four-Hour Fugue" (1974)
Starburst (1958)
The Dark Side of the Earth (1964)
An Alfred Bester Omnibus (1968)
Starlight: The Great Short Fiction of Alfred Bester (1976)
The Light Fantastic Volume 1: The Short Fiction of Alfred Bester (1976)
Star Light, Star Bright: The Short Fiction of Alfred Bester, Volume 2 (1976)
The Light Fantastic Volume 2: The Short Fiction of Alfred Bester (1976)
Virtual Unrealities (1997)
Redemolished (2000)
The Life and Death of a Satellite (1966)
v
t
e
Edmond Dantès
Abbé Faria
The Count of Monte Cristo (1912)
The Count of Monte Cristo (1913)
The Count of Monte Cristo (1918)
Monte Cristo (1922)
Monte Cristo (1929)
The Count of Monte Cristo (1934)
The Son of Monte Cristo (1940)
El Conde de Monte Cristo (1942)
The Count of Monte Cristo (1943)
The Return of Monte Cristo (1946)
The Wife of Monte Cristo (1946)
Mask of the Avenger (1951)
The Sword of Monte Cristo (1951)
The Count of Monte Cristo (1953)
The Count of Monte Cristo (1954)
Karkottai (1954)
Vanji Kottai Valipan (1958)
Raj Tilak (1958)
The Count of Monte Cristo (1961)
The Treasure of Monte Cristo (1961)
The Return of Monte Cristo (1968)
Jeevan Mrityu (1970)
The Count of Monte Cristo (1975)
Bhuierantlo Munis (1977)
Padayottam (1982)
Veta (1986)
Legacy of Rage (1986)
The Prisoner of Château d'If (1988)
The Count of Monte Cristo (2002)
The Count of Monte Cristo (2024)
The Count of Monte Cristo (1956)
The Count of Monte Cristo (1958)
The Count of Monte Cristo (1964)
The Count of Monte Cristo (1973)
The Count of Monte Cristo (1998 miniseries)
Gankutsuou: The Count of Monte Cristo
Montecristo
Ezel Yago (Mexican remake)
Yago (Mexican remake)
Revenge İntikam (Turkish remake) Venganza (Colombian remake) Karmma Calling (Indian remake)
İntikam (Turkish remake)
Venganza (Colombian remake)
Karmma Calling (Indian remake)
Miss Monte-Cristo
El Conde: Amor y honor
The Count of Monte Cristo (2024)
The Stars My Destination
The Stars' Tennis Balls
A Prisoner of Birth
The Baron of Magister Valley
Château d'If
Montecristo
The Black Count: Glory, Revolution, Betrayal, and the Real Count of Monte Cristo (biography)
The Count of Monte Cristo (Wildhorn-Murphy musical)
The Count of Monte Cristo (Behr musical)
Christ 0 (album)
Auguste Maquet (collaborator)
Pierre Picaud (possible prototype)
Dumas (2010 film)
"Revenge Is a Dish Best Served Three Times" (The Simpsons episode)
The Monte Cristo of Prague (1929 film)


URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Death_of_Grass
Content:

The Death of Grass (US title No Blade of Grass) is a 1956 post-apocalyptic science fiction novel written by the English author Sam Youd under the pen name John Christopher. The plot concerns a virus that kills off grass species, including rice and wheat. The Death of Grass was the first of several post-apocalyptic novels written by Youd. The novel was written in a matter of weeks and liberated him from his day job.
It was published in the United States both in book form and serialized in The Saturday Evening Post, as No Blade of Grass; supposedly the US publisher thought the original title "sounded like something out of a gardening catalogue".[1] Its publication in The Saturday Evening Post provoked considerable reaction amongst its readers on account of its portrayal of government's response to the unfolding worldwide crisis. The film rights were sold to MGM;[2] the 1970 film, No Blade of Grass, was produced and directed by Cornel Wilde.


## Plot
A new virus strain has infected rice crops in East Asia causing massive famine; the virus is also revealed to be found in the UK but because of its selectivity does not affect the country's agriculture. After the introduction of a new pesticide, developed in preference to breeding resistant crops, a mutated virus appears and infects the staple crops of West Asia and Europe such as wheat and barley—all of the grasses (thus the novel's title). It threatens a famine engulfing the whole of the Old World, while Australasia and the Americas attempt to impose rigorous quarantine to keep the virus out.
The novel follows the struggles of engineer John Custance and his friend, civil servant Roger Buckley, as, along with their families, they make their way across an England which is rapidly descending into anarchy, hoping to reach the safety of John's brother's potato farm in an isolated Westmorland valley. Buckley, having advance warning of the government's plot to hydrogen bomb major cities, alerts Custance to evacuate. Picking up a travelling companion, a gun shop owner named Pirrie, after an attempt to procure arms, they find that they must sacrifice many of the aspects of the morality they held before the famine in order to stay alive. At one point, when their food supply runs out, they kill a family to take their bread, John justifying it with the belief that "it was them or us."
Before reaching the valley, John takes in a large group of peaceful survivors. The group later survives encounters with a violent biker gang and soldiers attacking a farmhouse. After arriving at the valley, they find that John's brother is unable to let them all in to the heavily defended valley. Pirrie prevents John from taking only his immediate family into the valley; instead, the group takes the valley by force. Pirrie and John's brother are killed; John takes possession of the valley.


## Adaptations
A dramatised version was broadcast on BBC radio in 1957.[3] Another adaptation for the BBC World Service was broadcast in 1986.[4]
A film adaptation, No Blade of Grass (1970), was produced and directed by Cornel Wilde.
In 2009, as part of a BBC Radio 4 science fiction season, the station broadcast a drama in five episodes, based on the novel and narrated by David Mitchell.[5]


## References
^ Robert Macfarlane, "Introduction" in John Christopher (2009). The Death of Grass. Penguin.
^ John Christopher's life and works
^ "The Death of Grass - BBC Home Service Basic, 29 April 1957". BBC Genome Project. 29 April 1957. Retrieved 26 July 2017.
^ "BBCWS+RA.cc: John Christopher's The Death Of Grass RADIO DRAMA (1986) – SFFaudio". 2 October 2012. Retrieved 20 October 2023.
^ "Woman's Hour Drama - The Death of Grass". BBC. 2 March 2009.
v
t
e
The White Mountains (1967)
The City of Gold and Lead (1967)
The Pool of Fire (1968)
When the Tripods Came (1988)
The Prince in Waiting (1970)
Beyond the Burning Lands (1971)
The Sword of the Spirits (1972)
Fireball (1981)
New Found Land (1983)
Dragon Dance (1986)
The Twenty-Second Century (1954)
The Year of the Comet (1955)
The Death of Grass (1956)
The Caves of Night (1958)
A Scent of White Poppies (1959)
The Long Voyage (1960)
The World in Winter (1962)
Cloud on Silver (1964)
The Possessors (1964)
A Wrinkle in the Skin (1965)
The Little People (1967)
Pendulum (1968)
The Lotus Caves (1969)
The Guardians (1970)
Dom and Va (1973)
Wild Jack (1974)
Empty World (1977)
A Dusk of Demons (1993)
Bad Dream (2003)
No Blade of Grass (1970)
The Tripods (TV series) (1984–1985)


URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_City_and_the_Stars
Content:

The City and the Stars is a science fiction novel by British writer Arthur C. Clarke, published in 1956. This novel is a complete rewrite of Clarke's earlier Against the Fall of Night, his first novel, which had been published in Startling Stories magazine in 1948 after being rejected by the editor of Astounding Science-Fiction, according to the author.
Several years later, Clarke revised his novel extensively and renamed it The City and the Stars. The new version was intended to showcase what he had learned about writing, and about information processing. The major differences are in individual scenes and in the details of his contrasting civilizations of Diaspar and Lys. Against the Fall of Night remained popular enough to stay in print after The City and the Stars had been published. In introductions to it Clarke has told the anecdote of a psychiatrist and patient who admitted that they had discussed it one day in therapy, without realizing at the time that one had read one novel and one the other.


## Synopsis


### Setting
The City and the Stars takes place at least two and a half billion years from the present in the city of Diaspar.[note 1] By this time, the Earth's oceans have gone and humanity has all but departed. As far as the people of Diaspar know, theirs is the only city remaining on the planet. The city of Diaspar is completely enclosed. Nobody has entered or left the city for as long as anybody can remember, and everybody in Diaspar has an instinctive insular conservatism. The story behind this fear of venturing outside the city tells of a race of ruthless invaders which beat humanity back from the stars to Earth, and then made a deal that humanity may live—if they never leave the planet.
In Diaspar, the entire city is run by the Central Computer. The city is repaired by machines, and its people are created by them. The computer creates bodies for the people of Diaspar to live in and stores their minds in its memory at the end of their lives. At any time, only a small number of these people are actually living in Diaspar; the rest are retained in the computer's memory banks.
All the people currently living in Diaspar have had past "lives" within Diaspar except one person—Alvin, the main character of this story. He is one of only a very small number of "Uniques", different from everybody else in Diaspar, not only because he has no past lives to remember, but because instead of fearing the outside, he feels compelled to leave. Alvin has just come to the age where he is considered grown up, and is putting all his energies to trying to find a way out. Eventually, a character named Khedron the Jester helps Alvin use the central computer to find a way out of the city of Diaspar. This involves the discovery that in the remote past, Diaspar was linked to other cities by an underground transport system. This system still exists, although its terminal is covered over and sealed, with only a secret entrance left.


### Alvin's quest
Once out of Diaspar, Alvin discovers that another human habitation remains on Earth. In contrast to the technological Diaspar, Lys is a vast green oasis shielded by mountains from the worldwide desert. Its people are not stored and recreated technologically, but naturally conceive, are born, age, and die. They have rejected the hyper-advanced technology of Diaspar in favor of a largely agrarian existence, with machines used only for labor-saving purposes. The people of Lys have instead worked to perfect the arts of the mind; they are telepaths, capable of communicating with each other over great distances and without words.
Alvin continues his quest until he finds out the truth of why the people of Diaspar are so frightened of the external universe and why Lys is so scared of space travel and mechanical things. In Lys, he goes on a trip with a young man named Hilvar, who becomes his friend, and they see a signal light, which they decide to investigate. It leads them to Shalmirane, the remains of the fortress where the Invaders were fought off with unimaginable weapons, and there they encounter an extraterrestrial creature with a strange robot. The creature is the last survivor of a religious cult dating back to the days of the Galactic Empire. The robot was the companion of the founder, the "Master", who came with his followers to Earth at the end of his life. Alvin and Hilvar are unable to understand the content of the religion except that it refers to "Great Ones" who have left, but will someday return. Alvin persuades the creature to lend him the robot, arguing that the Master would want it to see how things were developing in the world. The Master had, however, forbidden the robot to give out any information at all, so Alvin does not learn anything.
Alvin instructs the robot to ignore his entreaties to take him back to Lys, knowing the people of Lys would use their great telepathic powers to induce him to return—the previous 14 Uniques had stayed. They had originally told Alvin he would be free to choose whether to stay or return, but because the people of Lys had their own insular failure, just like Diaspar, this option was no longer available. Back in Diaspar, he seeks the help of the Central Computer, which overcomes the Master's block on the robot by creating the illusion of an apocalyptic return of the Great Ones. This differs from the solution used in the original novel, which was to create a duplicate of the robot without the block.


### Discoveries
Alvin learns that the Master's ship is still functional, buried outside Diaspar. He manages to retrieve it, then fetches Hilvar from Lys, and they travel into deep space. They encounter Vanamonde, a being of pure intellect, with whom Hilvar—being telepathic like other Lys people—can communicate and bring him back to Earth. From him the truth of history finally emerges.
The fearsome Invaders, it turns out, were a myth: Shalmirane was actually used to destroy the Moon to prevent it from colliding with the Earth. Diaspar and Lys are the descendants of those humans who deliberately turned away from the universe in rejection of history's greatest scientific project: the creation of a disembodied intellect. The first attempt had created a powerful but insane being, the Mad Mind. The Mad Mind had devastated the galaxy and its civilizations before being imprisoned in a "strange artificial star" called the Black Sun.
Vanamonde is the second, successful, experiment of the ancient empire: a being of pure intellect, immensely old, immensely powerful, able to move instantly to any point in space—but entirely childlike and unsophisticated. Vanamonde's ultimate destiny, Hilvar realizes, is to battle the Mad Mind, when it escapes its prison at the end of time.
After this, most of the Galactic Empire had left our galaxy, leaving only a scattered few. This departure from the galaxy, leaving it to Vanamonde, was made because they had been contacted by a "very strange and very great" intelligent, extraterrestrial species, which called them urgently to the other side of the universe.
Alvin's discoveries reunite Diaspar with Lys. He then sends the ship, under the command of the robot, to search for the long-lost people of the Empire. He has no wish to join the search—even if there are human remnants in the Galaxy, they are probably decadent—and he has work to do on Earth. Even the environment, he hopes, can be revived.


## Print history
1956, The City and the Stars, Muller, ISBN (NOT AVAILABLE)
1956, The City and the Stars, Harcourt, ISBN 0-15-118023-7
1957, The City and the Stars, Corgi, ISBN 0-552-11219-4
1968, The City and the Stars, Gollancz, ISBN 0-575-00159-3
1976, The City and the Stars, Signet, ISBN 0-451-06452-6
1991, The City and the Stars, Spectra, ISBN 0-553-28853-9
2001, The City and the Stars, Gollancz, ISBN 1-85798-763-2


## See also
1956 in science fiction
The book Beyond the Fall of Night (1990) includes a sequel by Gregory Benford to Against the Fall of Night


## References
^ Prescott, Orville (27 January 1956). "Books of The Times". The New York Times: 21. His newest novel, The City and the Stars, is published today.
^ Per the novel, ten rotations of the Galaxy since the advent of the human species (one rotation of the Solar System around the galactic center being equivalent to 220–250 million years)


## External links
The City and the Stars title listing at the Internet Speculative Fiction Database
v
t
e
Bibliography
Prelude to Space
The Sands of Mars
Islands in the Sky
Against the Fall of Night
Childhood's End
Earthlight
The City and the Stars
The Deep Range
A Fall of Moondust
Dolphin Island
Glide Path
Imperial Earth
The Fountains of Paradise
The Songs of Distant Earth
Cradle (with Gentry Lee)
The Ghost from the Grand Banks
The Hammer of God
Richter 10 (with Mike McQuay)
The Trigger (with Michael Kube-McDowell)
The Light of Other Days (with Stephen Baxter)
The Last Theorem (with Frederik Pohl)
2001: A Space Odyssey
2010: Odyssey Two
2061: Odyssey Three
3001: The Final Odyssey
Rendezvous with Rama
Rama II (with Gentry Lee)
The Garden of Rama (with Gentry Lee)
Rama Revealed (with Gentry Lee)
Time's Eye (with Stephen Baxter)
Sunstorm (with Stephen Baxter)
Firstborn (with Stephen Baxter)
Expedition to Earth
Reach for Tomorrow
Tales from the White Hart
The Other Side of the Sky
Tales of Ten Worlds
The Nine Billion Names of God
Of Time and Stars
The Wind from the Sun
The Best of Arthur C. Clarke
The Sentinel
Tales from Planet Earth
More Than One Universe
The Collected Stories of Arthur C. Clarke
Interplanetary Flight: An Introduction to Astronautics
The Lost Worlds of 2001
The View from Serendip
The Odyssey File: The Making of 2010
How the World Was One: Beyond the Global Village
An Encyclopedia of Claims, Frauds, and Hoaxes of the Occult and Supernatural
2001: A Space Odyssey (comics)
2010: The Year We Make Contact (film)
The Nine Billion Names of God (short film)
Rendezvous with Rama (video game)
"The Star" (TV episode)
The Songs of Distant Earth (album)
Rama (video game)
Childhood's End (TV miniseries)
Arthur C. Clarke in media
Sir Arthur Clarke Award
Arthur C. Clarke Award
Geostationary orbit
Clarke's three laws
Arthur C. Clarke's Mysterious World
Arthur C. Clarke's World of Strange Powers
Arthur C. Clarke's Mysterious Universe
Arthur C. Clarke Institute for Modern Technologies
God, the Universe and Everything Else
Great Basses wreck
4923 Clarke
Serendipaceratops
GRB 080319B


URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Door_into_Summer
Content:

The Door into Summer is a science fiction novel by American science fiction writer Robert A. Heinlein, originally serialized in The Magazine of Fantasy & Science Fiction (October, November, December 1956, with covers and interior illustrations by Kelly Freas). It was published in hardcover in 1957.[1]


## Conception
The idea for the novel came from an incident outlined by Heinlein later:
When we were living in Colorado there was snowfall. Our cat—I'm a cat man—wanted to get out of the house so I opened a door for him but he wouldn't leave. Just kept on crying. He'd seen snow before and I couldn't understand it. I kept opening other doors for him and he still wouldn't leave. Then Ginny said, "Oh, he's looking for a door into summer." I threw up my hands, told her not to say another word, and wrote the novel The Door into Summer in 13 days.[2]


## Plot
The novel opens in 1970 with Daniel Boone Davis, an engineer and inventor, well into a long drinking binge. He has lost his company, Hired Girl, Inc., to his partner Miles Gentry and the company bookkeeper, Belle Darkin. Darkin had been Dan's fiancée, deceiving him into giving her enough voting stock to allow her and Miles to seize control. Dan's only friend in the world is his cat, "Pete" (short for Petronius the Arbiter), a feisty tomcat who hates going outdoors in the snow.
Hired Girl, Inc. manufactures robot vacuum cleaners, but Dan had been developing a new line of all-purpose household robots, Flexible Frank, when Miles announces his intention to sell the company (and Flexible Frank) to Mannix Enterprises in which Miles would become a vice president. Wishing to stay independent, Dan opposes the takeover, but is outvoted and then fired as Chief Engineer. Left with a large financial settlement, and his remaining Hired Girl stock, he elects to take "cold sleep" (suspended animation), hoping to wake up thirty years later to a brighter future. The examining doctor at the cold sleep facility immediately sees that Dan has been drinking. He warns him to show up sober or not at all 24 hours later for the actual procedure.
After becoming sober, Dan decides instead to mount a counter-attack. First he mails his Hired Girl stock certificate to the one person he trusts, Miles' stepdaughter Frederica "Ricky" Virginia Gentry. Dan confronts Miles and finds Belle in Miles' home. Belle injects him with an illegal "zombie" drug, reducing him to somnolent compliance. Belle and Miles discover Dan's plans to go into cold sleep and have him committed, but to a different repository run by one of Belle's shady associates for the Mannix corporation.
Dan wakes up in the year 2000 with no money to his name and no idea how to find the people he once knew. What little money Belle let him keep went with the collapse of Mannix in 1987. He has lost Pete the cat, who fled Miles' house after Dan was drugged, and has no idea how to find a now middle-aged Ricky.
Dan begins rebuilding his life. He persuades Geary Manufacturing, which now owns Hired Girl, to take him on as a figurehead. He discovers that Miles died in 1972, while Belle has become a shrill and gin-sodden wreck. All she recalls is that Ricky went to live with her grandmother about the time Dan went into cold sleep. Her scheme with Miles collapsed, as the Flexible Frank prototype disappeared the same night she tricked Dan.
Dan finds Flexible Frank in use everywhere, filling many menial jobs once filled by people. It is called "Eager Beaver", made by a company called "Aladdin Auto-engineering." Dan can see that someone has taken his prototype and developed it. He is even more baffled to find that the patent is credited to a "D.B. Davis".
His friend Chuck at Geary lets slip that he once saw time travel working, in a lab in Colorado. At that point Dan finds that Ricky has been awakened from cold sleep and left Los Angeles for Brawley, California. Dan tracks her to Yuma, Arizona, where she was apparently married. When Dan looks at the marriage register, he finds that she married "Daniel Boone Davis". He immediately empties his bank account and heads for Colorado.
In Boulder, he befriends Dr. Twitchell, a once-brilliant scientist reduced to drinking away his frustrations. Eventually, Twitchell admits to having created a time machine of sorts. With the machine powered up, Dan goads Twitchell into sending him back to 1970, some months before his confrontation with Miles and Belle. He materializes in a Denver naturist retreat in front of a couple, John and Jenny Sutton, whom he befriends. The husband, a lawyer by trade, helps Dan cash in the gold he has brought back with him. In the future gold is no longer a coinage metal and costs a fraction of its value in 1970.
Working rapidly, Dan creates "Drafting Dan", an automated drafting machine, which he then uses to design "Protean Pete", the first version of Eager Beaver. He sets up a new corporation with the Suttons called "Aladdin Auto-engineering", returns to Los Angeles, and stakes out Miles' house on the fateful night. Watching himself arrive, he lets events unfold until Pete the cat emerges, then takes his own car and uses it to remove Flexible Frank and all his engineering drawings from Miles' garage.
Destroying the drawings and scattering machine parts across the landscape, he heads out to meet Ricky at her Girl Scout summer camp. Dan assigns his stock in Hired Girl to Ricky and suggests that she takes cold sleep when she is 21 so they can meet again. Ricky asks Dan if he will marry her after their cold sleep and Dan agrees. Dan returns to Los Angeles to use his original appointment for cold sleep, pleading that he lost the original paperwork.
With Pete in his arms, he sleeps for the second time until 2001. He greets Ricky, now twenty-one, when she awakes. They leave for Brawley to retrieve her possessions from storage, and then are married in Yuma. Setting himself up as an independent inventor, he uses Ricky's Hired Girl stock to make changes at Geary, settling back to watch the healthy competition with Aladdin.


## Major themes
Some of Heinlein's stories, such as "'—All You Zombies—'" and "By His Bootstraps", feature time travel in which the protagonist re-creates himself using a time-travel paradox. This novel follows a similar theme, although the paradox is not central to the story. The idea recurs in the 1964 novel Farnham's Freehold, which hurls its protagonists into the future and then returns them to their own time, where they alter their destiny.
The novel is also post-apocalyptic, in that it takes place after a nuclear armed conflict. The United States was the clear victor, thanks to technologies that include the "cold sleep", which was used to maintain a large standing army that could be revived quickly and put into the field. The "zombie drug" used was a by-product of interrogation techniques. In the future time, "zombie recruiters" are apparently active, suggesting that the drug is widely used to recruit a form of slave labor.
It is mentioned that Washington, D.C., was destroyed, with the capital moved to Denver, Colorado, and there were also some hits on the East Coast and in Texas. However, the book in effect makes light of it. The United States rapidly recovers, refugees from devastated areas move to unharmed places, especially California, and the nuclear war leaves no lasting trauma. The 1984 book Warday by Whitley Strieber and James Kunetka takes up a limited nuclear attack in precisely the locations mentioned in Heinlein's book and depicts how hugely destructive it could be.
The early Heinlein biographer and critic Alexei Panshin, in his 1968 biography Heinlein in Dimension, took note of a controversial theme: "The romantic situation in this story is a very interesting, very odd one: it is nothing less than a mutual sexual interest between an engineer of thirty and a girl of twelve ('adorable' is Heinlein's word for her), that culminates in marriage after some hop-scotching around in time to adjust their ages a bit."[3]: 149–150


## Characters
Daniel Boone Davis, reflecting much of the author's own character. An engineer and inventor, he is a fierce individualist. The only friends he has in the world are his cat Pete and young Ricky, wise beyond her years.
Miles Gentry, Dan's former Army buddy and business partner, handling the financial and legal side.
Belle S. Darkin, who presents herself to Miles and Dan when they most need help with the company. She is apparently a brilliant secretary, bookkeeper and office manager who is willing to work for a pittance. In reality she is an accomplished fraud artist with an extensive criminal record, several aliases, and a number of previous marriages which were never dissolved. She seduces first Dan, then Miles.
Frederica Virginia "Ricky" Heinicke, physically an 11-year-old girl but emotionally almost adult. Like all Heinlein's heroines from this period, she is an intelligent redhead, and clearly modeled on Virginia Heinlein, even having a version of her name and her childhood nickname, Rikki-Tikki-Tavi.
Petronius the Arbiter, or Pete, Dan's cat. Highly vocal with a wide range of expressive sounds, he acts as a sounding board for Dan's ruminations and fulminations. He goes everywhere with Dan, carried around in an overnight bag, emerging when Dan orders him a ginger ale in a bar, or buys him food at drive-in restaurants.
Chuck Freudenberg, Dan's "beer buddy" and best friend at Geary Manufacturing.
Dr. Hubert Twitchell, a brilliant physicist at the University of Colorado Boulder, who invents time travel while studying anti-gravity, only to see his work declared top secret by an armchair colonel looking for promotion to general, robbing Twitchell of a Nobel Prize.
John and Jenny Sutton, a couple in their 30s who see Dan appear suddenly in their naturist club in 1970. Being tolerant, level-headed people, they help Dan in his mission. John is a lawyer and takes care of the legal angles.


## Reception
The novel "worried and bothered" John W. Campbell, who said "Bob can write a better story, with one hand tied behind him, than most people in the field can do with both hands. But Jesus, I wish that son of a gun would take that other hand out of his pocket."[4]
Science fiction writer and critic James Blish, writing in 1957, shortly after publication, criticized the lack of characterization of its hero Dan Davis, saying, "It is surely an odd novel that is at its best when the author is openly editorializing ..." — in this case about the "parity system of farm price supports, which in 2000 is applied to automobiles. ... Every other important subject of science fiction which Heinlein has examined at length has come out remade, vitalized and made the author's own property. It didn't happen here, for the first time in Heinlein's long and distinguished career — and not because Heinlein didn't have something to say, but because he failed to embody it in a real protagonist. Evidently, Heinlein as his own hero is about played out."[5] Floyd C. Gale was more positive in his 1957 review, comparing the book to The Sleeper Awakes and writing that "Heinlein paints a detailed picture of both civilizations, so evocative that 1970 emerges clearly in the reader's mind as the old days, and pretty primitive at that ... Of course you'll like Heinlein's latest".[6] The critic Alexei Panshin, writing in 1968, said that "as a whole, the story is thoroughly melodramatic but very good fun. ... It was as though Heinlein the engineer said, 'If I had the parts available, what little gadgets would I most enjoy building?' and then went ahead and built them fictionally. A good story."[3]: 78 After criticizing unrealistic science fiction, Carl Sagan in 1978 listed The Door Into Summer as among stories "that are so tautly constructed, so rich in the accommodating details of an unfamiliar society that they sweep me along before I have even a chance to be critical".[7]
In three Locus magazine readers' polls from 1975 to 1998, it was judged the 36th, 29th, and the 43rd all-time best science-fiction novel.[8]
In 2019, James Nicoll described it as "an evergreen novel in the sense that it somehow manages to be even more problematic every time I reread it", and noted that a major component of the plot is "middle aged man grooming a tween"; Nicoll did, however, concede that "[Heinlein] gets the future wrong but does so entertainingly. Some of his robot and gadget ideas are interesting."[9]


## Adaptations
CREDEUS Inc. adapted the novel into the feature film 夏への扉 キミのいる未来へ (The Door into Summer), which was directed by Takahiro Miki and released on February 19, 2021. It closely follows the original plot, with the setting changed from the United States in 1970 and 2000 to Japan in 1995 and 2025.[10]


## In popular culture
In 1967, the American rock group The Monkees, recorded the song "The Door into Summer" for their album Pisces, Aquarius, Capricorn & Jones Ltd. The song was written by Chip Douglas and Bill Martin and performed by Michael Nesmith (lead vocals) and Micky Dolenz (back-up vocals). In a livestream interview in 2020, Nesmith directly attributes the inspiration for the song to the story about Heinlein's cat looking for the "Door into Summer".[11] The song is about longing and regret for a life based primarily on the accumulation of material things. Other than the title, the song has little to do with the story told in the novel.


## General and cited sources
More Issues at Hand, by James Blish, writing as William Atheling, Jr., Chicago: Advent:Publishers, Inc., 1970
Heinlein in Dimension, by Alexei Panshin, Chicago: Advent:Publishers, Inc., 1968


## Citations
^ Heinlein, Robert A. (1957). The Door Into Summer, Doubleday, New York. ISBN 0-330-02516-3
^ "Well the fastest was—I'll have to explain. When we were living in Colorado there was snowfall. Our cat—I'm a cat man—wanted to get out of the house so I opened a door for him but he wouldn't leave. Just kept on crying. He'd seen snow before and I couldn't understand it. I kept opening other doors for him and he still wouldn't leave. Then Ginny said, 'Oh, he's looking for a door into summer.' I threw up my hands, told her not to say another word, and wrote the novel The Door into Summer in 13 days." Heinlein interview with Alfred Bester; Redemolished, p. 487, ISBN 0-7434-0725-3.
^ a b Heinlein in Dimension, by Alexei Panshin, Advent:Publishers, Chicago, 1968
^ John W. Campbell (May 11, 1956). Gorsch, Robert (ed.). "Letter to Isaac Asimov". Campbell on Heinlein: Selections from The John W. Campbell Letters. The Heinlein Society.
^ James Blish, The Issues at Hand, page 54–56.
^ Gale, Floyd C. (July 1957). "Galaxy's 5 Star Shelf". Galaxy. pp. 108–111. Retrieved June 11, 2014.
^ Sagan, Carl (May 28, 1978). "Growing up with Science Fiction". The New York Times. p. SM7. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved December 12, 2018.
^ Bibliography: The Door into Summer
^ Thank Heaven for Little Girls, by James Nicoll; at James Nicoll Reviews; published November 24, 2019; retrieved August 24, 2024
^ "The Door Into Summer". Rotten Tomatoes. Retrieved December 2, 2023.
^ Nesmith, Michael (April 3, 2020). "Live Q&A with Mickey & Mike!". YouTube. Archived from the original on December 11, 2021.


## External links
The Door into Summer title listing at the Internet Speculative Fiction Database
The Door into Summer at Open Library
The Door into Summer parts one, two, and three on the Internet Archive
v
t
e
Bibliography
The Man Who Sold the Moon (1950)
The Green Hills of Earth (1951)
Revolt in 2100 (1953)
Methuselah's Children (1958)
Orphans of the Sky (1963)
The Past Through Tomorrow (1967)
Time Enough for Love (1973)
The Notebooks of Lazarus Long (1978)
The Number of the Beast (1980)
The Cat Who Walks Through Walls (1985)
To Sail Beyond the Sunset (1987)
The Pursuit of the Pankera (2020)
Rocket Ship Galileo (1947)
Space Cadet (1948)
Red Planet (1949)
Farmer in the Sky (1950)
Between Planets (1951)
The Rolling Stones (1952)
Starman Jones (1953)
The Star Beast (1954)
Tunnel in the Sky (1955)
Time for the Stars (1956)
Citizen of the Galaxy (1957)
Have Space Suit—Will Travel (1958)
For Us, the Living: A Comedy of Customs (1939/2003)
Beyond This Horizon (1948)
Sixth Column (1949)
The Puppet Masters (1951)
Variable Star (1955/2006)
Double Star (1956)
The Door into Summer (1957)
Starship Troopers (1959)
Stranger in a Strange Land (1961)
Podkayne of Mars (1963)
Glory Road (1963)
Farnham's Freehold (1964)
The Moon Is a Harsh Mistress (1966)
I Will Fear No Evil (1970)
Friday (1982)
Job: A Comedy of Justice (1984)
The Robert Heinlein Omnibus (1958)
The Unpleasant Profession of Jonathan Hoag (1959)
The Worlds of Robert A. Heinlein (1966)
Expanded Universe (1980)
Requiem (1992)
Take Back Your Government (1946/1992)
Tramp Royale (1954/1992)
Grumbles from the Grave (1989)
Destination Moon (1950)
Project Moonbase (1953)
Delos D. Harriman
Jubal Harshaw
Maureen Johnson
Andrew Jackson Libby
Lazarus Long
Hazel Stone
Heinlein Centennial
Heinlein Society Robert A. Heinlein Award
Robert A. Heinlein Award
Heinlein Prize for Advances in Space Commercialization
Virginia Heinlein
The Robert Heinlein Interview and Other Heinleiniana
Tribbles
Grok
The Puppet Masters
Starship Troopers
Predestination


URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Midwich_Cuckoos
Content:

The Midwich Cuckoos is a 1957 science fiction novel written by the English author John Wyndham. It tells the tale of an English village in which the women become pregnant by brood parasitic aliens. The book has been praised by many critics, including the dramatist Dan Rebellato, who called it "a searching novel of moral ambiguities", and the novelist Margaret Atwood, who called the book Wyndham's "chef d'œuvre". The book has been adapted for film, radio, and television.


## Plot
Ambulances arrive at two traffic accidents blocking the only roads into the English village of Midwich, Winshire. Attempting to approach the village, one ambulance-man becomes unconscious. Suspecting gas poisoning, the army is notified. They discover that a caged canary becomes unconscious upon entering the affected region, but regains consciousness when removed. Further experiments reveal the region to be a hemisphere with a diameter of 2 mi (3.2 km) around the village. Aerial photography shows an unidentifiable silvery object on the ground in the centre of the affected zone.
After one day, the effect vanishes, along with the unidentified object and the villagers wake with no apparent ill effects. Some months later they realise that every woman of child-bearing age is pregnant with all indications that the pregnancies were caused by xenogenesis during the period of unconsciousness that has come to be referred to as the "Dayout".
When the 31 boys and 30 girls are born, they appear normal, except for their unusual golden eyes, light blonde hair and pale, silvery skin. The children have none of the genetic characteristics of their mothers. As they grow up, it becomes increasingly apparent that they are not completely human. They possess telepathic abilities and can control others' actions. The Children (they are referred to with a capital C) have two distinct group minds, one for the boys and another for the girls. Their physical development is accelerated compared with that of humans; upon reaching the age of nine, they appear to be sixteen-year-olds.
The Children protect themselves as much as possible using a form of mind control. One young man who accidentally clips a Child on the hip with his car is made to drive into a wall and kill himself. A bull that chased the Children is forced into a pond to drown. The villagers form a mob and try to burn down the Midwich Grange (a farm where the Children are taught and live) but the Children make the villagers attack each other.
The Military Intelligence department learns that the same phenomenon has occurred in four other parts of the world, including an Inuit settlement in the Canadian Arctic, a small township in Australia's Northern Territory, a Mongolian village and the town of Gizhinsk in eastern Russia, north-east of Okhotsk. The Inuit killed the newborn Children, sensing they were not their own, and the Mongolians killed both Children and mothers. The Australian babies had all died within a few weeks, suggesting that something may have gone wrong with the xenogenesis process. The Russian town was recently "accidentally" destroyed by the Soviet government, using an atomic cannon from a range of 50–60 mi (80–97 km).
The Children are aware of the danger and use their power to prevent aeroplanes from flying over the village. During an interview with a Military Intelligence officer, the Children explain that to solve the problem they must be destroyed. They explain it is not possible to kill them unless the entire village is bombed, which would result in civilian deaths. The Children present an ultimatum, they want to migrate to a secure location where they can live unharmed. They demand aeroplanes from the government.
An elderly, educated, Midwich resident, named Gordon Zellaby, realises the Children must be killed as soon as possible. As he has only a few weeks left to live due to a heart condition, he feels obliged to do something. He has acted as a teacher of and mentor to the Children and they regard him with as much affection as they can have for any human, permitting him to approach them more closely than others. One evening, he hides a bomb in his projection equipment while showing the Children a film about the Greek islands. Zellaby sets off the bomb, killing himself and all of the Children.


## Cuckoos
The "cuckoo" in the novel's title alludes to a family of birds, of which nearly 60 species are brood parasites, laying their eggs in the nests of other birds.[1] These species are obligate brood parasites, only reproducing in this way, the best-known example being the Eurasian cuckoo. The cuckoo egg hatches earlier than the host's, and the cuckoo chick grows faster; in most cases the chick evicts the eggs or young of the host species, while encouraging the host to keep pace with its high growth rate.[2][3]


## Reception
The Galaxy columnist Floyd C. Gale, reviewing the original issue in 1958, praised the novel as "a most off-trail and well-written invasion yarn."[4] Thomas M. Wagner of SFReviews.net concluded in 2004 that the novel "remains a cracking good read despite some obviously dated elements."[5] Damon Knight, however, wrote in 1967 that Wyndham's novelistic treatment "is deadly serious, and I'm sorry to say, deadly dull ... about page 90 the story begins to bog down under layers of polite restraint, sentimentality, lethargy and women's-magazine masochism, and it never lifts its head long again."[6] The writer Christina Hardyment, writing in The Times in 2008, commented that the book packed even more of a punch in an age of "genetic experimentation" than it had done in the 1950s.[7]


### Dan Rebellato
The dramatist Dan Rebellato, writing in The Guardian in 2010, called Wyndham probably the most successful British science fiction author since H. G. Wells and his books so familiar that people do not study them closely. In Rebellato's view, The Midwich Cuckoos was, on rereading, "a searching novel of moral ambiguities where once I'd seen only an inventive but simple SF thriller", a book that questioned the assumptions of its narrator character. It dealt, he argued, with the struggle between men and women at least as much as between people and aliens, touching on rape, abortion, childbirth and motherhood, with a subtext a great deal more subtle than the narrator's brusque story. Rebellato observed, too, that Wyndham was writing in the 1950s under the Lord Chamberlain's censorship for obscenity, so his use of "misdirection, subtext, irony and ambiguity" were necessary to allow publication of his discussion of sexuality.[8] Rebellato addresses, too, the New Wave science fiction writer Brian Aldiss's criticism of Wyndham's books as "cosy catastrophes"; in Rebellato’s view, the stories may look like that but they are "surprisingly unheroic" and often open-ended, while underneath they are "very uncosy, persistently unsettling", asking profound questions about the limits of Western culture.[9][8]


### Margaret Atwood
The novelist Margaret Atwood, writing in Slate in 2015, commented that in her opinion, The Midwich Cuckoos was John Wyndham's chef d'œuvre, selling very well, "cozy catastrophes" or not, though she observed that "one might as well call World War II—of which Wyndham was a veteran—a 'cozy' war because not everyone died in it". She noted, too, that just like the children in The Chrysalids, the cuckoo children use their special abilities to help each other and that Wyndham never made up his mind on the moral question of whether it would be a good thing to know what other people were thinking.[10]


## Cancelled sequel
Wyndham began work on a sequel novel, Midwich Main, which he abandoned after only a few chapters.[11]


## Adaptations


### Film
Village of the Damned (1960), film directed by Wolf Rilla
Children of the Damned (1964), a sequel directed by Anton Leader
Village of the Damned (1995), directed by John Carpenter. It featured Christopher Reeve in his last film role before he was paralysed, and included Kirstie Alley as a government official, in roles similar to the characters of Gordon Zellaby and Colonel Westcott, respectively.
A Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer remake to have begun filming during 1981 was cancelled. Christopher Wood was in the midst of writing a script for producer Lawrence P. Bachmann when the Writers Guild of America intervened.[12][13]
The 1994 Thai movie Blackbirds at Bangpleng is based on a 1989 novel by the Thai writer and politician Kukrit Pramoj, which in turn is derived from Wyndham's book.[14]


### Television
The Midwich Cuckoos (2022), miniseries directed by Alice Troughton, Jennifer Perrott and Börkur Sigþórsson [is]


### Radio
A 1982 radio production adapted by William Ingram in three 30-minute episodes for the BBC World Service. It was first broadcast between 9 and 23 December 1982. It was directed by Gordon House, with music by Roger Limb of the BBC Radiophonic Workshop. It is regularly repeated on BBC Radio 4 Extra.
A 2003 radio production adapted by Dan Rebellato in two 60-minute episodes for BBC Radio 4. It was first broadcast between 30 November and 7 December 2003. It was directed by Polly Thomas, with music by Chris Madin. It was released on CD by BBC Audiobooks in 2007.
A 2017-18 radio production adapted by Graeae Theatre Company was broadcast on BBC Radio 4 on 31 December 2017 and 7 January 2018.[15]


## See also
Dark They Were, and Golden-Eyed


## References
^ Payne R.B. (1997) "Family Cuculidae (Cuckoos)", pp. 508–545 in del Hoyo J, Elliott A, Sargatal J (eds) (1997). Handbook of the Birds of the World Volume 4; Sandgrouse to Cuckoos Lynx Edicions: Barcelona. ISBN 84-87334-22-9
^ Adams, Stephen (4 January 2009). "Cuckoo chicks dupe foster parents from the moment they hatch". The Daily Telegraph. London. Archived from the original on 13 February 2009. Retrieved 30 April 2010. Cuckoo chicks start to mimic the cries that their foster parents' young make from the moment they hatch, a scientist has proved.
^ Biology (4th edition) NA Campbell, p. 117 'Fixed Action Patterns' (Benjamin Cummings New York, 1996) ISBN 0-8053-1957-3
^ Gale, Floyd C. (October 1958). "Galaxy's 5 Star Shelf". Galaxy Science Fiction. p. 130. Retrieved 27 April 2011.
^ Wagner, Thomas M. (2004). "The Midwich Cuckoos / John Wyndham". SF Reviews.net. Archived from the original on 18 April 2019. Retrieved 17 March 2011.
^ Knight, Damon (1967). In Search of Wonder. Chicago: Advent. ISBN 0-911682-31-7.
^ Hardyment, Christina (27 June 2008). "The Midwich Cuckoos by John Wyndham and Nostromo by Joseph Conrad". The Times. Retrieved 20 June 2018.
^ a b Rebellato, Dan (20 December 2010). "John Wyndham: The unread bestseller". The Guardian. Retrieved 20 June 2018.
^ Aldiss, Brian W. (1973). Billion year spree: the history of science fiction. Weidenfeld & Nicolson. p. 293. ISBN 978-0-297-76555-4.
^ Atwood, Margaret (8 September 2015). "Chocky, the Kindly Body Snatcher". Slate. Archived from the original on 20 June 2018. Retrieved 20 June 2018.
^ "Vivisection": Schoolboy "John Wyndham's" FirstPublication? by David Ketterer Archived 8 January 2004 at the Wayback Machine, Science Fiction Studies #78, Volume 26, Part 2, July 1999. Retrieved 26 February 2015
^ "Movie is Cuckoo". Windsor Star. 9 April 1981. p. 29.
^ "Future Projects". Film Bulletin. 49. Philadelphia: Wax Publications: 20. July 1981.
^ Movie review Archived 30 December 2006 at the Wayback Machine at You Call Yourself a Scientist, retrieved on 2 March 2007.
^ Graeae's Midwich Cuckoos


## External links
The Midwich Cuckoos title listing at the Internet Speculative Fiction Database
John Wyndham at IMDb
v
t
e
The Secret People
Foul Play Suspected
Stowaway to Mars
The Day of the Triffids
The Kraken Wakes
The Chrysalids
The Midwich Cuckoos
The Outward Urge
Trouble with Lichen
Chocky
Web
Plan for Chaos
"Consider Her Ways"
"Random Quest"
Jizzle
The Seeds of Time
Tales of Gooseflesh and Laughter
Consider Her Ways and Others
The Infinite Moment
Sleepers of Mars
The Best of John Wyndham
Wanderers of Time
Exiles on Asperus
No Place Like Earth
The Day of the Triffids
Village of the Damned (1960)
Quest for Love
Village of the Damned (1995)
The Day of the Triffids (1981)
Chocky
The Day of the Triffids (2009)
The Midwich Cuckoos (2022)
Triffid
The Chrysalids (radio drama)
Children of the Damned
Blackbirds at Bangpleng
The Night of the Triffids


URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Non-Stop_(novel)
Content:

Non-Stop is a 1958 science fiction novel by British writer Brian Aldiss. It is about problems that the inhabitants of a huge generation space ship face after an alien amino acid that they picked up on another planet triggers a pandemic. Law and order began to collapse, and knowledge of the ship and of its purpose was eventually almost entirely lost throughout the vessel.
It was the author's first science fiction novel. Originally published by Faber & Faber, it was published in the US by Criterion Books as Starship in 1959. The novel has been frequently republished in the UK and US and translated into French, German, Danish and other languages.[1] The Signet and Avon US paperback editions were also published under the title Starship, but American publishers Carroll & Graf and Overlook Press have used the title Non-Stop.[2]


## Plot summary
The novel's protagonist, Roy Complain, lives in a culturally primitive tribe on a massive generation ship, which has descended into an uncivilized state. The ship is overgrown by vegetation, and the inhabitants have clustered into warring tribes. In Roy's tribe, curiosity is discouraged, and life is solitary, poor, nasty, brutish, and short. With a small group, he leaves his home and ventures into uncharted territory on the ship. The consequent discoveries will change his perception of the entire universe.
Complain's small tribe roams nomadically through corridors that are overrun by vegetation. After his wife is kidnapped, a tribal priest, Marapper, encourages Complain to join a furtive expedition into the unexplored corridors. Marapper believes that they are all living on board a moving spacecraft and that if they can reach the control room, they will gain command of the entire gargantuan vessel.
On their journey, the group encounters other tribes of varying levels of sophistication. Complain is also briefly captured by humanoid 'Giants' of legend, who release him with no explanation. Complain's party eventually join the more sophisticated society of the 'Forwards'. There, they learn that the spacecraft is a multi-generational starship returning from a newly colonised planet in the Procyon star system. In a previous generation, the ship's inhabitants had suffered from a pandemic because of an alien amino acid found in the waters of the Procyon planet. Law and order began to collapse, and knowledge of the ship and its purpose was eventually almost entirely lost throughout the vessel. Since the 'Catastrophe', 23 generations have passed so far.
The Forwards have uncertain knowledge of 'Giants', who, though feared, are generally considered to be benevolent. Other mysterious beings, 'Outsiders', are thought to infiltrate the human world from an unknown place and are reviled as enemies. However, when the Giants attack a Forward crew member, the humans conclude that the Giants and Outsiders are colluding against humanity and prepare to retaliate in force. Meanwhile, Complain and his developing romantic interest, Vyann, a Forward officer, learn that the spacecraft should have taken only six generations to return to Earth. Aware that 23 generations have passed since the epidemic, they despairingly deduce that the entire spacecraft is now plummeting into the cold expanse of infinite space. Although they find the ship's control centre, all of its mechanisms have been destroyed.
The Forwards briefly engage the Giants, but the conflict quickly ends. It is then revealed that the ship has been moored outside Earth's atmosphere for a number of years. The 'Giants' are merely normal-sized Earth-humans, who have been attempting to improve the conditions of the ship's inhabitants by slowly repairing the vessel. The 'Outsiders' are unusually short humans from Earth, who have infiltrated the ship's various societies to study the development of their civilization.
The rulers of Earth have been reluctant to integrate the ship-dwellers into Earth's civilization because the epidemic survivors have mutated to live four times faster than Earth's population. However, the recent battle on board the spacecraft has caused it to begin an emergency split into its composite parts, which ensures that the entire population will now be granted a new start on Earth.


## Reception
Galaxy reviewer Floyd C. Gale gave the novel a mixed review, rating the book 3 1/2 stars out of five and faulting "the shock ending [which] is abrupt and leaves so much unanswered".[3] He later compared the book's "impact to Tumithak".[4]
In 2000, the book was republished as part of the SF Masterworks series. This edition contained some minor revisions by the author.[5]
In 2008 the book was retrospectively awarded the British Science Fiction Association Award for best novel of 1958.[6]


## See also
1958 in science fiction
Generation ship
Orphans of the Sky by Robert A. Heinlein
Captive Universe by Harry Harrison
Metamorphosis Alpha, a role-playing game with many similar elements.
The Starlost, Canadian television series about a generation ship.
Pandorum, a movie directed by Christian Alvart, with somewhat similar themes.


## References
^ Formats & Editions at WorldCat
^ Non-Stop at ISFDB
^ "Galaxy's 5 Star Shelf", Galaxy Science Fiction, December 1959, p.151
^ Gale, Floyd C. (April 1961). "Galaxy's 5 Star Shelf". Galaxy Science Fiction. pp. 131–135.
^ A review by Rich Horton at SF Site
^ "SFE: Aldiss, Brian W".


## External links
Page on Brian Aldiss's official website
Internet Book List
Generic Discontinuities in SF: Brian Aldiss' Starship
Non-Stop title listing at the Internet Speculative Fiction Database
VIAF


URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/A_Case_of_Conscience
Content:

A Case of Conscience is a science fiction novel by American writer James Blish, first published in 1958. It is the story of a Jesuit who investigates an alien race that has no religion yet has a perfect, innate sense of morality, a situation which conflicts with Catholic teaching. The story was originally published as a novella in 1953, and later extended to novel-length, of which the first part is the original novella. The novel is the first part of Blish's thematic After Such Knowledge trilogy and was followed by Doctor Mirabilis and both Black Easter and The Day After Judgment (two novellas that Blish viewed as together forming the third volume of the trilogy).
Few science fiction stories of the time attempted religious themes, and still fewer did this with Catholicism.


## Plot


### Part 1
In 2049, Father Ramon Ruiz-Sanchez of Peru, Clerk Regular of the Society of Jesus, is a member of a four-man team of scientists sent to the planet Lithia to determine if it can be opened to human contact. Ruiz-Sanchez is a biologist and biochemist, and he serves as the team doctor. However, as a Jesuit, he has religious concerns as well. The planet is inhabited by a race of intelligent bipedal reptile-like creatures, the Lithians. Ruiz-Sanchez has learned to speak their language to learn about them.
While on a walking survey of the land, Cleaver, a physicist, is poisoned by a plant, despite a protective suit, and he suffers badly. Ruiz-Sanchez treats him and leaves to send a message to the others: Michelis, a chemist, and Agronski, a geologist. He is helped by Chtexa, a Lithian whom he has befriended, who then invites him to his house. This is an opportunity which Ruiz-Sanchez cannot decline; no member of the team has been invited into Lithian living places before. The Lithians seem to have an ideal society, a utopia without crime, conflict, ignorance or want. Ruiz-Sanchez is awed.
When the team is reassembled, they compare their observations of the Lithians. Soon they will have to officially pronounce their verdict. Michelis is open-minded and sympathetic to the Lithians. He has learned their language and some of their customs. Agronski is more insular in his outlook, but he sees no reason to consider the planet dangerous. When Cleaver revives, he reveals that he wants the place exploited, regardless of the Lithians' wishes. He has found enough pegmatite (a source of lithium, which is rare on Earth) that a factory could be set up to supply Earth with lithium deuteride for nuclear weapons. Michelis is for open trade. Agronski is indifferent.
Ruiz-Sanchez makes a major declaration: he wants maximum quarantine. The information Chtexa revealed to him, added to what he already knew, convinces him that Lithia is nothing less than the work of Satan, a place deliberately constructed to show peace, logic, and understanding in the complete absence of God. Point for point, Ruiz-Sanchez lists the facts about Lithia that directly attack Catholic teaching. Michelis is mystified, but does point out that all the Lithian science he has learned, while perfectly logical, rests on highly questionable assumptions. It is as if it just came from nowhere.
The team can come to no agreement. Ruiz-Sanchez concludes that Cleaver's intentions will probably prevail and Lithian society will be exterminated. Despite his conclusions about the planet, he has a deep affection for the Lithians.
As the humans board their ship to leave, Chtexa gives Ruiz-Sanchez a gift—a sealed jar containing an egg. It is a son of Chtexa, to be raised on Earth and learn the ways of humans. At this point, the Jesuit solves a riddle which he has been pondering for some time, from Book III of Finnegans Wake by James Joyce (pp. 572–3), which proposes a complex case of marital morals, ending with the question "Has he hegemony and shall she submit?" To the Church, neither "Yes" nor "No" is a morally satisfactory answer. Ruiz-Sanchez sees that it is two questions, despite the omission of a comma between the two, so that the answer can be "Yes and No".


### Part 2
The egg hatches and grows into the individual Egtverchi. Like all Lithians, he inherits knowledge from his father through his DNA. Earth society is based on the nuclear shelters of the 20th century, with most people living underground. Egtverchi is the proverbial firecracker in an anthill; he upends society and precipitates violence.
Ruiz-Sanchez has to go to Rome to face judgment. His conviction about Lithia is viewed as heresy, since he believes Satan has the power to create a planet. This is close to Manichaeism. He has an audience with the Pope himself to explain his beliefs. Pope Hadrian VIII, a logically and technologically aware Norwegian, points out two things Ruiz-Sanchez missed. First, Lithia could have been a deception, not a creation. And second, Ruiz-Sanchez could have done something about it, namely, perform an exorcism on the whole planet. The priest bows his head in shame that he has overlooked an obvious solution to his own case of conscience while he was absorbed in "a book [Finnegans Wake] which to all intents and purposes might have been dictated by the Adversary himself ... 628 pages of compulsive demoniac chatter." The Pope dismisses Ruiz-Sanchez to purge his own soul and to return to the Church if and when he can.
A violent mass riot breaks out, fomented by Egtverchi and made possible by the psychosis present in many of the citizens as a result of living in the 'shelter state' (an earlier reference to the "Corridor Riots of 1993" indicates that this is not the first time violence has burst out among the buried cities). During the riot, Agronski dies as a result of being stung by one or more genetically modified honey bees. Ruiz-Sanchez administers Extreme Unction, despite his almost-faithless state. Egtverchi secretly boards a spaceship to Lithia. Michelis and Ruiz-Sanchez are taken to the Moon, where a new telescope has been assembled, based on "a fundamental twist on the Haertel equations which makes it possible to see around normal space-time, as well as travel around it"[1] so that the instrument presents a view of Lithia in real time, bypassing the delay caused by the speed of light. Cleaver is on Lithia, setting up his reactors, but the physicist who invented the telescope technology believes he has found a fault in Cleaver's reasoning. There is a chance that the work will set off a chain reaction in the planet's rocks and destroy it.
As they watch on the screen, Ruiz-Sanchez pronounces an exorcism. The planet explodes, eliminating Cleaver and Egtverchi, but also Chtexa and all the things Ruiz-Sanchez admired. It is left ambiguous whether the extinction of the Lithians is a result of Ruiz-Sanchez's prayer or Cleaver's error.


## Reception
While faulting the novel for "extreme unevenness", Galaxy reviewer Floyd C. Gale concluded that A Case of Conscience was "a provocative, serious, commendable work" and characterized it as "trailblaz[ing]".[2] Anthony Boucher found Blish's protagonist "a credible and moving figure" and praised the opening segment; however he faulted the later material for "los[ing] focus and impact" and "wander[ing]" to an ending that seems "merely chaotic."[3] In his "Books" column for The Magazine of Fantasy & Science Fiction, Damon Knight selected Blish's novel as one of the ten best science fiction books of the 1950s.[4] He reviewed the novel as "resonat[ing] with a note of its own. . . . it is complete and perfect."[5]
On the other hand, Br. Guy Consolmagno, S.J., the director of the Vatican Observatory, suggested that this novel was written without much knowledge of Jesuits, saying that "[its] theology isn't only bad theology, it's not Jesuit theology."[6] In a foreword, Blish mentions that he had heard objections to the theology, but countered that the theology was that of a future Church rather than the present one, and that in any case he set out to write about "not a body of faith, but a man". He also received, and quoted, the official Church policy on contact with extraterrestrial intelligent life forms. The policy described such life forms as being possibly without immortal souls, or having immortal souls and being "fallen", or having souls and existing in a state of Grace, listing the approach to be taken in each case.
In 2012 the novel was included in the Library of America two-volume boxed set American Science Fiction: Nine Classic Novels of the 1950s, edited by Gary K. Wolfe.[7]


## Awards and nominations
The novel won a Hugo Award in 1959. The original novella won a Retrospective Hugo Award in 2004.


## See also
1958 in science fiction
Arthur C. Clarke's short story "The Star", in which a Jesuit scientist finds out a faith-shaking fact about a supernova.
Rebuttal by Betsy Curtis, a sequel and response to The Star, with a doctor who is also a priest speaking with the original story's narrator after his return to Earth.
Mary Doria Russell's The Sparrow and sequel Children of God which feature a Jesuit linguist/priest who has a crisis of faith confronting alien cultures.


## Citations
^ Blish 1999, p. 135
^ "Galaxy's 5 Star Shelf", Galaxy Magazine, February 1959, pp. 139–140.
^ "Recommended Reading", F&SF, August 1958, p. 105.
^ Damon Knight. "Books", F&SF, April 1960, p. 99.
^ Knight, Damon. "In the Balance", If, December 1958, pp. 108–09.
^ Cleary, Grayson (November 10, 2015). "Why Sci-Fi Has So Many Catholics". The Atlantic. Retrieved June 25, 2017.
^ Itzkoff, Dave (July 13, 2012). "Classic Sci-Fi Novels Get Futuristic Enhancements from Library of America". The New York Times. Retrieved January 9, 2013.


## General and cited references
Blish, James (1999). A Case of Conscience. London: Millennium. ISBN 1-85798-924-4. OCLC 43540200.
Tuck, Donald H. (1974). The Encyclopedia of Science Fiction and Fantasy. Vol. 1?. Chicago: Advent. p. 28. ISBN 0-911682-20-1.


## External links
A Case of Conscience title listing at the Internet Speculative Fiction Database
v
t
e
The Sword in the Stone by T. H. White (1939)
Slan by A. E. van Vogt (1941)
Beyond This Horizon by Anson MacDonald (1943)
Conjure Wife by Fritz Leiber (1944)
Shadow Over Mars by Leigh Brackett (1945)
The Mule by Isaac Asimov (1946)
Farmer in the Sky by Robert A. Heinlein (1951)
Fahrenheit 451 by Ray Bradbury (1954)
The Demolished Man by Alfred Bester (1953)
They'd Rather Be Right (aka: The Forever Machine) by Mark Clifton and Frank Riley (1955)
Double Star by Robert A. Heinlein (1956)
The Big Time by Fritz Leiber (1958)
A Case of Conscience by James Blish (1959)
Starship Troopers by Robert A. Heinlein (1960)
A Canticle for Leibowitz by Walter M. Miller, Jr. (1961)
Stranger in a Strange Land by Robert A. Heinlein (1962)
The Man in the High Castle by Philip K. Dick (1963)
Here Gather the Stars (aka: Way Station) by Clifford D. Simak (1964)
The Wanderer by Fritz Leiber (1965)
Dune by Frank Herbert / ...And Call Me Conrad (aka: This Immortal) by Roger Zelazny (1966)
The Moon Is a Harsh Mistress by Robert A. Heinlein (1967)
Lord of Light by Roger Zelazny (1968)
Stand on Zanzibar by John Brunner (1969)
The Left Hand of Darkness by Ursula K. Le Guin (1970)
Ringworld by Larry Niven (1971)
To Your Scattered Bodies Go by Philip José Farmer (1972)
The Gods Themselves by Isaac Asimov (1973)
Rendezvous with Rama by Arthur C. Clarke (1974)
The Dispossessed by Ursula K. Le Guin (1975)
The Forever War by Joe Haldeman (1976)
Where Late the Sweet Birds Sang by Kate Wilhelm (1977)
Gateway by Frederik Pohl (1978)
Dreamsnake by Vonda N. McIntyre (1979)
The Fountains of Paradise by Arthur C. Clarke (1980)
The Snow Queen by Joan D. Vinge (1981)
Downbelow Station by C. J. Cherryh (1982)
Foundation's Edge by Isaac Asimov (1983)
Startide Rising by David Brin (1984)
Neuromancer by William Gibson (1985)
Ender's Game by Orson Scott Card (1986)
Speaker for the Dead by Orson Scott Card (1987)
The Uplift War by David Brin (1988)
Cyteen by C. J. Cherryh (1989)
Hyperion by Dan Simmons (1990)
The Vor Game by Lois McMaster Bujold (1991)
Barrayar by Lois McMaster Bujold (1992)
A Fire Upon the Deep by Vernor Vinge / Doomsday Book by Connie Willis (1993)
Green Mars by Kim Stanley Robinson (1994)
Mirror Dance by Lois McMaster Bujold (1995)
The Diamond Age by Neal Stephenson (1996)
Blue Mars by Kim Stanley Robinson (1997)
Forever Peace by Joe Haldeman (1998)
To Say Nothing of the Dog by Connie Willis (1999)
A Deepness in the Sky by Vernor Vinge (2000)
Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire by J. K. Rowling (2001)
American Gods by Neil Gaiman (2002)
Hominids by Robert J. Sawyer (2003)
Paladin of Souls by Lois McMaster Bujold (2004)
Jonathan Strange & Mr Norrell by Susanna Clarke (2005)
Spin by Robert Charles Wilson (2006)
Rainbows End by Vernor Vinge (2007)
The Yiddish Policemen's Union by Michael Chabon (2008)
The Graveyard Book by Neil Gaiman (2009)
The Windup Girl by Paolo Bacigalupi / The City & the City by China Miéville (2010)
Blackout/All Clear by Connie Willis (2011)
Among Others by Jo Walton (2012)
Redshirts by John Scalzi (2013)
Ancillary Justice by Ann Leckie (2014)
The Three-Body Problem by Cixin Liu, translated by Ken Liu (2015)
The Fifth Season by N. K. Jemisin (2016)
The Obelisk Gate by N. K. Jemisin (2017)
The Stone Sky by N. K. Jemisin (2018)
The Calculating Stars by Mary Robinette Kowal (2019)
A Memory Called Empire by Arkady Martine (2020)
Network Effect by Martha Wells (2021)
A Desolation Called Peace by Arkady Martine (2022)
Nettle & Bone by T. Kingfisher (2023)
Some Desperate Glory by Emily Tesh (2024)
v
t
e
Who Goes There? by Don A. Stuart (1939)
"If This Goes On—" by Robert A. Heinlein (1941)
Waldo by Robert A. Heinlein (1943)
The Little Prince by Antoine de Saint-Exupéry (1944)
Killdozer! by Theodore Sturgeon (1945)
Animal Farm by George Orwell (1946)
The Man Who Sold the Moon by Robert A. Heinlein (1951)
A Case of Conscience by James Blish (1954)
Riders of the Purple Wage by Philip José Farmer / Weyr Search by Anne McCaffrey (1968)
Nightwings by Robert Silverberg (1969)
Ship of Shadows by Fritz Leiber (1970)
Ill Met in Lankhmar by Fritz Leiber (1971)
The Queen of Air and Darkness by Poul Anderson (1972)
The Word for World Is Forest by Ursula K. Le Guin (1973)
The Girl Who Was Plugged In by James Tiptree Jr. (1974)
A Song for Lya by George R. R. Martin (1975)
Home Is the Hangman by Roger Zelazny (1976)
By Any Other Name by Spider Robinson / Houston, Houston, Do You Read? by James Tiptree Jr. (1977)
Stardance by Spider Robinson and Jeanne Robinson (1978)
The Persistence of Vision by John Varley (1979)
Enemy Mine by Barry B. Longyear (1980)
Lost Dorsai by Gordon R. Dickson (1981)
The Saturn Game by Poul Anderson (1982)
Souls by Joanna Russ (1983)
Cascade Point by Timothy Zahn (1984)
Press Enter by John Varley (1985)
24 Views of Mt. Fuji, by Hokusai by Roger Zelazny (1986)
Gilgamesh in the Outback by Robert Silverberg (1987)
Eye for Eye by Orson Scott Card (1988)
The Last of the Winnebagos by Connie Willis (1989)
The Mountains of Mourning by Lois McMaster Bujold (1990)
The Hemingway Hoax by Joe Haldeman (1991)
Beggars in Spain by Nancy Kress (1992)
Barnacle Bill the Spacer by Lucius Shepard (1993)
Down in the Bottomlands by Harry Turtledove (1994)
Seven Views of Olduvai Gorge by Mike Resnick (1995)
The Death of Captain Future by Allen Steele (1996)
Blood of the Dragon by George R. R. Martin (1997)
...Where Angels Fear to Tread by Allen Steele (1998)
Oceanic by Greg Egan (1999)
The Winds of Marble Arch by Connie Willis (2000)
The Ultimate Earth by Jack Williamson (2001)
Fast Times at Fairmont High by Vernor Vinge (2002)
Coraline by Neil Gaiman (2003)
The Cookie Monster by Vernor Vinge (2004)
The Concrete Jungle by Charles Stross (2005)
Inside Job by Connie Willis (2006)
A Billion Eves by Robert Reed (2007)
All Seated on the Ground by Connie Willis (2008)
The Erdmann Nexus by Nancy Kress (2009)
Palimpsest by Charles Stross (2010)
The Lifecycle of Software Objects by Ted Chiang (2011)
The Man Who Bridged the Mist by Kij Johnson (2012)
The Emperor's Soul by Brandon Sanderson (2013)
Equoid by Charles Stross (2014)
(No award given) (2015)
Binti by Nnedi Okorafor (2016)
Every Heart a Doorway by Seanan McGuire (2017)
All Systems Red by Martha Wells (2018)
Artificial Condition by Martha Wells (2019)
This Is How You Lose the Time War by Amal El-Mohtar and Max Gladstone (2020)
The Empress of Salt and Fortune by Nghi Vo (2021)
A Psalm for the Wild-Built by Becky Chambers (2022)
Where the Drowned Girls Go by Seanan McGuire (2023)
Thornhedge by T. Kingfisher (2024)


URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Have_Space_Suit%E2%80%94Will_Travel
Content:

Have Space Suit—Will Travel is a science fiction novel for young readers by American writer Robert A. Heinlein, originally serialized in The Magazine of Fantasy & Science Fiction (August, September, and October 1958) and published by Scribner's in hardcover in 1958. The last Heinlein novel to be published by Scribner's, it was nominated for a Hugo Award in 1959[1] and won the Sequoyah Children's Book Award for 1961. Heinlein's engineering expertise enabled him to add realistic detail; during World War II, he had been a civilian aeronautics engineer at a laboratory which developed pressure suits for use at high altitudes.[2][3][4]


## Plot summary
In the near future, Earth has established some lunar bases. High school senior Clifford "Kip" Russell is determined to get to the Moon, but the price of a ticket is far beyond his reach. His unorthodox father suggests he enter an advertising jingle-writing contest; first prize is an all-expenses-paid trip there. Instead, he wins a used space suit. Kip puts the suit (which he names "Oscar") back into working condition.
Kip reluctantly decides to return his space suit for a cash prize to help pay for college, but puts it on for one last walk. As he idly broadcasts on his shortwave radio, someone identifying herself as "Peewee" answers and requests a homing signal. He is shocked when a flying saucer lands practically on top of him. An 11-year-old girl (Peewee) and an alien being (the "Mother Thing") flee from it, but all three are quickly captured and taken to the Moon.
Their kidnapper ("Wormface") is a horrible-looking creature who contemptuously refers to all others as "animals". Wormface has two human flunkies ("Fats" and "Skinny") who assisted him in initially capturing the Mother Thing and Peewee, the latter a genius and the daughter of an eminent scientist. The Mother Thing speaks in what sounds like birdsong (illustrated by a few musical notations), but Kip and Peewee have no trouble understanding her.
Kip, Peewee, and the Mother Thing escape and try to reach the nearest human lunar base on foot, but they are recaptured and taken to a base on Pluto. Kip is thrown into a cell, later to be joined by Fats and Skinny, who have apparently outlived their usefulness. After Skinny is taken away, Fats tells Kip that his former employers eat humans, before he too disappears.
The Mother Thing, meanwhile, makes herself useful to their captors by constructing advanced devices for them. She manages to steal enough parts to assemble a bomb and a transmitter. The bomb takes care of all but one of the Wormfaces, and between them, Kip and Peewee deal with the last one. The Mother Thing freezes solid when she tries to set up the transmitter outside without a spacesuit. Kip puts Oscar on and activates the beacon, but becomes severely frostbitten in the extreme cold. Help arrives quickly. Kip, Peewee and the Mother Thing are transported to Vega V, the Mother Thing's home planet.
Kip is kept in a state of cryopreservation while the Mother Thing's people figure out how to heal him. It turns out that the Mother Thing is far hardier than Kip had suspected and freezing did not hurt her. While Kip recuperates, a Vegan anthropologist whom Kip nicknames "Joe" learns about Earth from Peewee and Kip. Once Kip is well, he, Peewee, and the Mother Thing travel to a planet in the Lesser Magellanic Cloud, to face an intergalactic tribunal, composed of many advanced species that have banded together for self-protection.
The Wormfaces are put on trial first. Their representatives are so arrogantly xenophobic that they promise to destroy the "animals" who dared to try the "Only People", and are judged to be dangerous. Their species is sentenced to have their planet "rotated" 90° out of the present space-time ... without their star, most likely dooming them to freezing to death.
Then it is humanity's turn to be judged, as represented by Peewee, Kip, and two additional humans retrieved from different historical eras: Iunio (an ancient Roman centurion), and a Neanderthal man. The Neanderthal is rejected as being of another species. Iunio proves belligerent, but brave. Peewee's and Kip's recorded remarks are then admitted into evidence. In humanity's defense, Kip makes an impassioned speech. The Mother Thing and a representative of another race argue that the short-lived species are essentially children who should be granted more time to learn and grow. It is decided to re-evaluate humanity after "a dozen half-deaths of radium" (19,200 years).
Kip and Peewee are returned to Earth with advanced alien devices and scientific equations provided by the Vegans to help the human race advance. Kip passes the information along to Professor Reisfeld, Peewee's father. Reisfeld arranges a full scholarship for Kip at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, where Kip wants to study engineering and spacesuit design.


## Reception
Floyd C. Gale wrote that the book "is possibly the most unabashedly juvenile of Heinlein's long list ... Great for kids, chancy for grownups who don't identify readily with adolescent heroes".[5]


## Film adaptation
In 2010, it was announced that Star Trek writer Harry Kloor had written a script for a film version and optioned the film rights. The film was expected to have come out in 2013,[6][7] but as of the end of 2013 was still listed as "in development".


## Editions
1958, Charles Scribner's Sons, hardcover
1970, Ace Books, paperback
1971, NEL, paperback, ISBN 0-450-00729-4
1977, Ballantine, paperback, ISBN 0-345-26071-6
May 1, 1977, Macmillan Publishing Company, hardcover, ISBN 0-684-14857-9
July 12, 1981, Del Rey, paperback, ISBN 0-345-30103-X
May 12, 1985, Del Rey, paperback, 256 pages, ISBN 0-345-32441-2
July 1, 1987, Hodder & Stoughton General Division, paperback, ISBN 0-450-00729-4
June 1, 1994, Buccaneer Books, hardcover, ISBN 1-56849-288-X
October 1, 1999, Sagebrush, library binding, ISBN 0-613-13639-X
July 2003, Del Rey Books, hardcover, ISBN 0-613-94907-2
July 29, 2003, Del Rey, paperback, 240 pages, ISBN 0-345-46107-X
December 1, 2003, Full Cast Audio, cassette audiobook, ISBN 1-932076-39-5
December 1, 2003, Full Cast Audio, cassette audiobook, ISBN 1-932076-40-9
December 1, 2003, Full Cast Audio, CD audiobook, ISBN 1-932076-41-7
February 8, 2005, Pocket, paperback, 256 pages, ISBN 1-4165-0549-0
December 2008, Virginia Edition (Vol. 21), hardcover, 192 pages, ISBN 978-1-897350-26-3
The cover for one of the French editions (Presses Pocket, 1978) is by notable science fiction illustrator Jean-Claude Mézières.


## See also
1958 in science fiction
Wielka, większa i największa - a Polish 1960 novel that features a similar plot


## References
^ "1959 Award Winners & Nominees". Worlds Without End. Retrieved July 27, 2009.
^ Pace, Eric (May 10, 1988). "Robert A. Heinlein Is Dead at 80; Renowned Science-Fiction Writer". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved March 3, 2024.
^ Power, Ed (October 1, 2021). "How Isaac Asimov's dark alchemy helped defeat Hitler". The Telegraph. ISSN 0307-1235. Retrieved March 3, 2024.
^ "Robert A. Heinlein | Biography, Movie Highlights and Photos". AllMovie. Retrieved March 3, 2024.
^ Gale, Floyd C. (August 1959). "Galaxy's 5 Star Star Shelf". Galaxy. pp. 138–142. Retrieved June 14, 2014.
^ "Star Trek writer adapting Heinlein's Have Spacesuit for a film | Blastr". Archived from the original on September 15, 2012. Retrieved July 14, 2011.
^ Have Space Suit—Will Travel at IMDb


## External links
Have Space Suit—Will Travel title listing at the Internet Speculative Fiction Database
Have Space Suit—Will Travel at Open Library
Have Space Suit – Will Travel at Worlds Without End
Have Space Suit—Will Travel parts one, two, and three on the Internet Archive
v
t
e
Bibliography
The Man Who Sold the Moon (1950)
The Green Hills of Earth (1951)
Revolt in 2100 (1953)
Methuselah's Children (1958)
Orphans of the Sky (1963)
The Past Through Tomorrow (1967)
Time Enough for Love (1973)
The Notebooks of Lazarus Long (1978)
The Number of the Beast (1980)
The Cat Who Walks Through Walls (1985)
To Sail Beyond the Sunset (1987)
The Pursuit of the Pankera (2020)
Rocket Ship Galileo (1947)
Space Cadet (1948)
Red Planet (1949)
Farmer in the Sky (1950)
Between Planets (1951)
The Rolling Stones (1952)
Starman Jones (1953)
The Star Beast (1954)
Tunnel in the Sky (1955)
Time for the Stars (1956)
Citizen of the Galaxy (1957)
Have Space Suit—Will Travel (1958)
For Us, the Living: A Comedy of Customs (1939/2003)
Beyond This Horizon (1948)
Sixth Column (1949)
The Puppet Masters (1951)
Variable Star (1955/2006)
Double Star (1956)
The Door into Summer (1957)
Starship Troopers (1959)
Stranger in a Strange Land (1961)
Podkayne of Mars (1963)
Glory Road (1963)
Farnham's Freehold (1964)
The Moon Is a Harsh Mistress (1966)
I Will Fear No Evil (1970)
Friday (1982)
Job: A Comedy of Justice (1984)
The Robert Heinlein Omnibus (1958)
The Unpleasant Profession of Jonathan Hoag (1959)
The Worlds of Robert A. Heinlein (1966)
Expanded Universe (1980)
Requiem (1992)
Take Back Your Government (1946/1992)
Tramp Royale (1954/1992)
Grumbles from the Grave (1989)
Destination Moon (1950)
Project Moonbase (1953)
Delos D. Harriman
Jubal Harshaw
Maureen Johnson
Andrew Jackson Libby
Lazarus Long
Hazel Stone
Heinlein Centennial
Heinlein Society Robert A. Heinlein Award
Robert A. Heinlein Award
Heinlein Prize for Advances in Space Commercialization
Virginia Heinlein
The Robert Heinlein Interview and Other Heinleiniana
Tribbles
Grok
The Puppet Masters
Starship Troopers
Predestination


URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Time_Out_of_Joint
Content:

Time Out of Joint is a science fiction novel by American writer Philip K. Dick, first published in novel form in the United States in 1959. An abridged version was also serialised in the British science fiction magazine New Worlds Science Fiction in several installments from December 1959 to February 1960.
The novel epitomizes many of Dick's themes with its concerns about the nature of reality and ordinary people in ordinary lives having the world unravel around them.[1] The title is a reference to Shakespeare's play Hamlet.[2] The line is uttered by Hamlet after being visited by his father's ghost and learning that his uncle Claudius murdered his father; in short, a shocking supernatural event that fundamentally alters the way Hamlet perceives the state and the universe ("The time is out of joint; O cursed spite!/That ever I was born to set it right!" [I.V.211-2]), much as do several events in the novel.


## Plot summary
Ragle Gumm lives in the year 1959 in a quiet American town. His unusual profession consists of repeatedly winning the cash prize in a national newspaper contest called "Where Will The Little Green Man Be Next?". Gumm's 1959 has some differences from ours: the Tucker car is in production, AM/FM radios are scarce to non-existent, and Marilyn Monroe is a complete unknown. As the novel opens, strange things begin to happen to Gumm. A soft-drink stand disappears, replaced by a small slip of paper with the words "SOFT-DRINK STAND" printed on it in block letters. Intriguing little pieces of the real 1959 turn up: a magazine article on Marilyn Monroe, a telephone book with non-operational exchanges listed and radios hidden away in someone else's house. People with no apparent connection to Gumm, including military pilots using aircraft transceivers, refer to him by name. Few other characters notice these or experience similar anomalies; the sole exception is Gumm's supposed brother-in-law, Victor "Vic" Nielson, in whom he confides. A neighborhood woman, Mrs. Keitelbein, invites him to a civil defense class where he sees a model of a futuristic underground military factory. He has the unshakeable feeling he's been inside that building many times before.
Confusion gradually mounts for Gumm. His neighbor Bill Black knows far more about these events than he admits, and, observing this, begins worrying: "Suppose Ragle [Gumm] is becoming sane again?" In fact, Gumm does become sane, and the deception surrounding him (erected to protect and exploit him) begins to unravel.
Gumm tries to escape the town and is turned back by Kafkaesque obstructions. He sees a copy of Time magazine, with himself on the cover as Man of the Year, in a military uniform, at the factory depicted in the model. He tries a second time to escape, this time with Vic, and succeeds. He learns that his idyllic town is a constructed reality designed to protect him from the frightening fact that he lives on a then-future Earth (circa 1998) that is at war against lunar colonists who are fighting for a permanent lunar settlement, politically independent from Earth.
Gumm has a unique ability to predict where the colonists' nuclear strikes will be aimed. Previously Gumm did this work for the military, but then he defected to the colonists' side and planned to secretly emigrate to the Moon. But before this could happen, he began retreating into a fantasy world based largely upon the relatively idyllic surroundings of his extreme youth. He was no longer able to shoulder his responsibility as Earth's lone protector from Lunar-launched nuclear offensives. The fake town was thereby created on the ruins of Kemmerer, Wyoming, to accommodate and rationalize his retreat to childhood so that he could continue predicting nuclear strikes in the guise of submitting entries to a harmless newspaper contest and without the ethical qualms involved with being on the "wrong" side of a civil war. While Gumm regressed by himself to a 1950s mindset, the rest of the town with a few exceptions like Black were all put in a similar state artificially, explaining why hardly anyone else could perceive anomalies.
When Gumm finally remembers his true personal history, he decides to emigrate to the Moon after all because he feels that exploration and migration, as basic human impulses, should never be denied to people by any national or planetary government. Vic rejects this belief, referring to the colonists essentially as aggressors and terrorists, and returns to the simulated town - which has lost its raison d'etre because of Gumm's escape from its environs. The book ends with some hope for peace, because the Lunar colonists are more willing to negotiate than Earth's "One Happy World" regime has been telling its citizens.


## Reception
Dave Langford reviewed Time Out of Joint for White Dwarf #57, and stated that "there are classic moments, as when reality blows a fuse and a soft-drink stand disintegrates before Gumm's eyes, leaving only a bit of paper with the words SOFT-DRINK STAND."[3]
Colin Greenland reviewed Time Out of Joint for Imagine magazine, and stated that "As usual, Dick's deadpan investigation of a paranoid world reveals more than a little of the unreal dimensions of our own 'safe' environments."[4]


## See also
Novels portal
Ding an sich, a concept mentioned in the story.
Simulated reality
Other works of fiction with a constructed reality: "They", a 1941 story by Robert A. Heinlein about a man surrounded by persons whose job is to convince him that he is insane rather than one of the few genuine people in his world. "The Tunnel Under the World", a 1954 science-fiction story by Frederik Pohl, in which a man wakes up over and over in a fake town established to test advertising campaigns. The Truman Show, a 1998 American comedy-drama film that chronicles the life of a man who discovers he is living in a constructed reality soap opera, televised 24/7. EDtv, a 1999 American comedy film about a man whose life gets turned into a TV show. The Incident, a 2014 Mexican film in which the book notably appears, about people trapped in an infinite loop. Don't Worry Darling, a 2022 American psychological thriller film about a 1950s housewife who discovers she is living against her will in a virtual reality constructed in the modern day.
"They", a 1941 story by Robert A. Heinlein about a man surrounded by persons whose job is to convince him that he is insane rather than one of the few genuine people in his world.
"The Tunnel Under the World", a 1954 science-fiction story by Frederik Pohl, in which a man wakes up over and over in a fake town established to test advertising campaigns.
The Truman Show, a 1998 American comedy-drama film that chronicles the life of a man who discovers he is living in a constructed reality soap opera, televised 24/7.
EDtv, a 1999 American comedy film about a man whose life gets turned into a TV show.
The Incident, a 2014 Mexican film in which the book notably appears, about people trapped in an infinite loop.
Don't Worry Darling, a 2022 American psychological thriller film about a 1950s housewife who discovers she is living against her will in a virtual reality constructed in the modern day.


## Sources
Rossi, Umberto, "Just a Bunch of Words: The Image of the Secluded Family and the Problem of logos in P.K. Dick's Time Out of Joint", Extrapolation, Vol. 37 No. 3, Fall 1996.
Rossi, Umberto, “The Harmless Yank Hobby: Maps, Games, Missiles and Sundry Paranoias in Time Out of Joint and Gravity’s Rainbow”, Pynchon Notes #52–53, Spring-Fall 2003, pp. 106–123


## References
^ Canaan, Howard (2008). "Time and Gnosis in the Writings of Philip K. Dick". Hungarian Journal of English and American Studies. 14 (2): 335–355. ISSN 1218-7364. JSTOR 41274434.
^ "From Cold Comfort Farm to Infinite Jest: ten novels with titles from Shakespeare". The Telegraph. March 24, 2016. Retrieved August 13, 2020.
^ Langford, Dave (September 1984). "Critical Mass". White Dwarf (57). Games Workshop: 14.
^ Greenland, Colin (September 1984). "Fantasy Media". Imagine (review) (18). TSR Hobbies (UK), Ltd.: 47.


## External links
Time Out of Joint title listing at the Internet Speculative Fiction Database
Summary at official PKD website
Time Out of Joint cover art gallery
v
t
e
Bibliography
Lost works
Gather Yourselves Together (1950)
Voices from the Street (1952)
Solar Lottery (1954)
Mary and the Giant (1954)
The World Jones Made (1954)
Eye in the Sky (1955)
The Man Who Japed (1955)
A Time for George Stavros (1956)
Pilgrim on the Hill (1956)
The Broken Bubble (1956)
The Cosmic Puppets (1957)
Puttering About in a Small Land (1957)
Nicholas and the Higs (1958)
Time Out of Joint (1958)
In Milton Lumky Territory (1958)
Confessions of a Crap Artist (1959)
The Man Whose Teeth Were All Exactly Alike (1960)
Humpty Dumpty in Oakland (1960)
Vulcan's Hammer (1960)
Dr. Futurity (1960)
The Man in the High Castle (1961)
We Can Build You (1962)
Martian Time-Slip (1962)
Dr. Bloodmoney, or How We Got Along After the Bomb (1963)
The Game-Players of Titan (1963)
The Simulacra (1963)
The Crack in Space (1963)
Clans of the Alphane Moon (1964)
The Three Stigmata of Palmer Eldritch (1964)
The Zap Gun (1964)
The Penultimate Truth (1964)
The Unteleported Man (1964)
The Ganymede Takeover (1965)
Counter-Clock World (1965)
Do Androids Dream of Electric Sheep? (1966)
Nick and the Glimmung (1966)
Now Wait for Last Year (1966)
Ubik (1966)
Galactic Pot-Healer (1968)
A Maze of Death (1968)
Our Friends from Frolix 8 (1969)
Flow My Tears, the Policeman Said (1974)
Deus Irae (1976)
Radio Free Albemuth (1976; published 1985)
A Scanner Darkly (1977)
Valis (1981)
The Divine Invasion (1981)
The Transmigration of Timothy Archer (1982)
The Owl in Daylight (unfinished)
A Handful of Darkness (1955)
The Variable Man (1956)
The Preserving Machine (1969)
The Book of Philip K. Dick (1973)
The Best of Philip K. Dick (1977)
The Golden Man (1980)
Robots, Androids, and Mechanical Oddities (1984)
I Hope I Shall Arrive Soon (1985)
The Collected Stories of Philip K. Dick (1987)
Beyond Lies the Wub (1988)
The Dark Haired Girl (1989)
The Father-Thing (1989)
Second Variety (1989)
The Days of Perky Pat (1990)
The Little Black Box (1990)
The Short Happy Life of the Brown Oxford (1990)
We Can Remember It for You Wholesale (1990)
The Minority Report (1991)
Second Variety (1991)
The Eye of the Sibyl (1992)
The Philip K. Dick Reader (1997)
Minority Report (2002)
Selected Stories of Philip K. Dick (2002)
Paycheck (2004)
Vintage PKD (2006)
The Exegesis of Philip K. Dick (2011)
"Beyond Lies the Wub" (1952)
"The Gun" (1952)
"The Skull" (1952)
"The Little Movement" (1952)
"The Defenders" (1953)
"Mr. Spaceship" (1953)
"Piper in the Woods" (1953)
"Roog" (1953)
"The Infinites" (1953)
"Second Variety" (1953)
"Colony" (1953)
"The Cookie Lady" (1953)
"Impostor" (1953)
"Paycheck" (1953)
"The Preserving Machine" (1953)
"Expendable" (1953)
"The Indefatigable Frog" (1953)
"The Commuter" (1953)
"Out in the Garden" (1953)
"The Great C" (1953)
"The King of the Elves" (1953)
"The Trouble with Bubbles" (1953)
"The Variable Man" (1953)
"The Impossible Planet" (1953)
"Planet for Transients" (1953)
"The Builder" (1953)
"Tony and the Beetles" (1953)
"The Hanging Stranger" (1953)
"Prize Ship" (1954)
"Beyond the Door" (1954)
"The Crystal Crypt" (1954)
"The Short Happy Life of the Brown Oxford" (1954)
"The Golden Man" (1954)
"Sales Pitch" (1954)
"Breakfast at Twilight" (1954)
"The Crawlers" (1954)
"Exhibit Piece" (1954)
"Adjustment Team" (1954)
"Shell Game" (1954)
"Meddler" (1954)
"A World of Talent" (1954)
"The Last of the Masters" (1954)
"Upon the Dull Earth" (1954)
"The Father-thing" (1954)
"Strange Eden" (1954)
"The Turning Wheel" (1954)
"Foster, You're Dead!" (1955)
"Human Is" (1955)
"War Veteran" (1955)
"Captive Market" (1955)
"Nanny" (1955)
"The Chromium Fence" (1955)
"Service Call" (1955)
"The Mold of Yancy" (1955)
"Autofac" (1955)
"Psi-man Heal My Child!" (1955)
"The Hood Maker" (1955)
"The Minority Report" (1956)
"Pay for the Printer" (1956)
"A Glass of Darkness (The Cosmic Puppets)" (1956)
"The Unreconstructed M" (1957)
"Null-O" (1958)
"Explorers We" (1959)
"Recall Mechanism" (1959)
"Fair Game" (1959)
"War Game" (1959)
"All We Marsmen" (1963)
"What'll We Do with Ragland Park?" (1963)
"The Days of Perky Pat" (1963)
"If There Were No Benny Cemoli" (1963)
"Waterspider" (1964)
"Novelty Act" (1964)
"Oh, to Be a Blobel!" (1964)
"The War with the Fnools" (1964)
"What the Dead Men Say" (1964)
"Orpheus with Clay Feet" (1964)
"Cantata 140" (1964)
"The Unteleported Man" (1964)
"The Little Black Box" (1964)
"Retreat Syndrome" (1965)
"Project Plowshare (later "The Zap Gun")" (1965)
"We Can Remember It for You Wholesale" (1966)
"Holy Quarrel" (1966)
"Faith of Our Fathers" (1967)
"Not by Its Cover" (1968)
"The Electric Ant" (1969)
"A. Lincoln, Simulacrum" (1969)
"The Pre-persons" (1974)
"A Little Something for Us Tempunauts" (1974)
"The Exit Door Leads In" (1979)
"Rautavaara's Case" (1980)
"I Hope I Shall Arrive Soon" (1980)
"The Eye of the Sibyl" (1987)
"Stability" (1987)
"The Android and the Human" (1972)
"If You Find This World Bad, You Should See Some of the Others" (1977)
Blade Runner (1982)
Total Recall (1990)
Barjo (1992)
Screamers (1995)
Impostor (2001)
Minority Report (2002)
Paycheck (2003)
A Scanner Darkly (2006)
Next (2007)
Screamers: The Hunting (2009)
Radio Free Albemuth (2010)
The Adjustment Bureau (2011)
Total Recall (2012)
Blade Runner 2049 (2017)
2036: Nexus Dawn (2017)
2048: Nowhere to Run (2017)
Blade Runner Black Out 2022 (2017)
Total Recall 2070 (1999)
The Man in the High Castle (2015–2019)
Minority Report (2015)
Electric Dreams (2017–2018)
Blade Runner: Black Lotus (2021–2022)
Blade Runner 2099 (upcoming)
Blade Runner franchise
Only Apparently Real (1986 biography)
I Am Alive and You Are Dead (1993 biography)
Your Name Here (2008 drama film)
Isa Dick Hackett (daughter)
Philip K. Dick Award
Category
Germany
MusicBrainz work


URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Alas,_Babylon
Content:

Alas, Babylon is a 1959 novel by American writer Pat Frank.[1] It is an early example of post-nuclear apocalyptic fiction and has an entry in David Pringle's book Science Fiction: The 100 Best Novels. The novel deals with the effects of a nuclear war on the fictional small town of Fort Repose, Florida, which is based upon the actual city of Mount Dora, Florida, approximately 35 miles northwest of Orlando, Florida.[2] The novel's title is derived from the Book of Revelation: "Alas, alas, that great city Babylon, that mighty city! for in one hour is thy judgment come." The cover art for the Bantam paperback edition was made by Robert Hunt.


## Plot
The novel starts in early December of an unspecified year in the early 1960s; the Soviet Union has just launched Sputnik 23.[n 1] Tensions have been escalating for two years between the United States and the Soviet Union for dominance in the Middle East and in the Mediterranean Sea. The Soviets are menacing Turkey from three sides through their proxies in Egypt, Syria and Iraq in order to gain control of the Bosporus and give free passage between the Black Sea and the Mediterranean to their large Mediterranean naval fleet. To counteract the Soviet threat, the United States established a military presence in Lebanon and is providing aid to their Turkish and Israeli allies. Meanwhile, the Soviets gained a temporary space supremacy through the launch of a fleet of militarized Sputniks; moreover, they are aware that, within three or four years, the United States will cover the gap. Intelligence from a Soviet officer who defected in Berlin provided information about a Soviet war plan involving a sudden, overwhelming nuclear first strike on U.S. and NATO military and civilian targets, in order to minimize retaliation and to ensure that the Soviet Union becomes the leading world power. According to the leaked war plan, the Soviet leadership considers acceptable the loss of 20 to 30 million of their own civilian population due to an anticipated retaliatory strike by NATO.
Randy Bragg, a failed political candidate and an attorney who occasionally practices law, lives an otherwise aimless life in the small Central Florida town of Fort Repose. The younger bachelor son of a prominent local family, his ancestors founded Fort Repose in the 1800s.[3] Randy's older brother, Colonel Mark Bragg, a U.S. Air Force intelligence officer at Strategic Air Command (SAC) headquarters at Offutt Air Force Base in Omaha, Nebraska, sends a telegram to Randy ending in the words, "Alas, Babylon", a pre-established code between the brothers to warn of imminent disaster. Shortly thereafter, Mark flies his family down to Orlando in order to stay with Randy at Fort Repose for their protection while Mark remains at SAC headquarters.[3]
Soon afterwards, a carrier-based U.S. Navy fighter pilot, attempting to intercept a Soviet plane over the Mediterranean, inadvertently destroys an ammunition depot at a large Soviet submarine base in Latakia, Syria. The explosion is mistaken for a large-scale U.S. air assault on the military facility and, by the following day, the Soviet Union retaliates with its planned full-scale nuclear strike against the United States and its allies. With Mark as a witness, U.S. intercontinental ballistic missiles are launched at the Soviet Union in retaliation. Randy and his guests awake to the shaking from the nuclear missile attacks on nearby military bases such as McCoy Air Force Base in Orlando and Naval Air Station Sanford; one explosion temporarily blinds Peyton, Randy's niece. The residents of Fort Repose later observe other mushroom clouds to the southwest and northeast, implying that MacDill Air Force Base and the city of Tampa as well as the city of Jacksonville and its multiple U.S. naval installations have also been destroyed.[4]
Following what is simply referred to as "The Day," Fort Repose descends into chaos: tourists are trapped in their hotels, communication lines fail, the CONELRAD radio system barely operates, convicts escape from prisons, and a run on the banks makes currency worthless. In the weeks and months after the attack, sporadic news gathered through an old but still-functioning vacuum tube radio receiver show that many major cities of the U.S. are in ruins and vast regions of the Continental United States are labeled by the government as off-limits "contaminated zones." Because of the numerous U.S. Air Force and U.S. Navy installations from one end of the state to the other that were struck during the Soviet attack, Florida is among the contaminated areas, leaving the stranded survivors of Fort Repose without hope of immediate assistance. Most of the U.S. government has been eliminated, with the U.S. presidency defaulting to Josephine Vanbruuker-Brown, the former Secretary of Health, Education and Welfare who is believed to be leading the nation from a location in Colorado.[4]
Other international broadcasts, heard over the shortwave radio of Randy's neighbor, retired Navy Rear Admiral Sam Hazzard,[3] reveal that Western Europe was badly hit by Soviet missiles as well, mentioning a dire situation in southern France. Soviet leadership was eliminated by the U.S. retaliation and the Soviet capital was moved to Central Asia, but war still rages for months after the attack, although it is fought mostly between the remnants of the U.S. Air Force and scattered Soviet Navy nuclear submarines.
A Korean War veteran still serving as a U.S. Army Reserve infantry officer before the Soviet attack, Randy learns in a radio dispatch by President Vanbruuker-Brown that she has directed any surviving active duty or reserve U.S. military officers to form local militias to keep the peace domestically.[4] This formally empowers Randy as the local authority under the current emergency situation. He then organizes a community self-defense force against bandits and tries to rid the community of radioactive jewelry brought into Fort Repose from the radioactive ruins of Miami. The search for alternative food sources is also prominent in the months following the attack, leading to the launch of a rag-tag fleet of fishing boats to sift the surrounding lakes, rivers and swamps for fish and to a desperate search for much-needed salt.
The following year, an Air Force helicopter arrives at Fort Repose. The crew assesses the status of the residents and the local environment, explaining that the area around Fort Repose is perhaps the largest patch of non-contaminated soil in Florida and that, after everything they have suffered, the survivors of Fort Repose managed to fare better than many other places in the US. Randy also learns that his brother, Mark, most likely died when Omaha and Offutt Air Force Base were destroyed by multiple Soviet nuclear missile strikes. When the crew of the helicopter offer to evacuate the residents out of Florida, the residents choose to stay.
It is eventually revealed that the United States formally won the war, but at a tremendous cost: the country lost almost 75% of its population. (Fewer than 45 million survivors are estimated overall; the population of the U.S. in the early 1960s had been approximately 180 million.) As well, the country lost most of its military, its infrastructure, and most of its natural resources—ironically, the U.S. government is planning to use the large stockpiles of military-grade uranium and plutonium left from the war to power the surviving towns and cities with nuclear reactors. The U.S. is now receiving food, fuel and medicine aid from third-world countries such as Thailand, Indonesia and Venezuela. According to a radio broadcast, the "Three Greats," India, China and Japan, have taken the role of the world's leading powers in place of the U.S. and the Soviet Union. The book ends by saying that things will not return to normal for 1,000 years and that Randy "...turned to face the thousand-year night."


## Reception
Galaxy reviewer Floyd C. Gale gave the novel a mixed review, rating it three stars out of five and concluding: "Frank stopped too soon with too little."[5]


## Influence


### People
John Lennon, known for his pacifist views, was given a copy of Alas, Babylon by journalist Larry Kane in 1965. Lennon spent all night reading the book, fueling his anti-war fervor and envisioning the world's population attempting to crawl their way back from the horrors of a nuclear catastrophe.[6]


### Literature
In his critical study The Modern Weird Tale (2001), S. T. Joshi compares Alas, Babylon favourably with Stephen King's The Stand, calling the former "a more interesting treatment of the same basic theme."[7]
In the foreword of the 2005 edition of Alas, Babylon, David Brin notes that the book was instrumental in shaping his views on nuclear war and influenced his own book, The Postman (1982).[8]
In the acknowledgements section at the beginning of his post-apocalyptic novel One Second After (2009), William R. Forstchen credits Alas, Babylon as an influence in writing his novel about the small town of Black Mountain, North Carolina.[9] The novel is set in a time after numerous electromagnetic pulses strike around the world, cutting off all sources of electricity to the town, and depicts the ensuing aftermath of sociological breakdown.
John Ringo's 2013 Under a Graveyard Sky, the first in his Black Tide Rising series, starts with an emergency code using the phrase "AlasBabylon."[10] Frank's book is referenced as the characters' inspiration for that code, and is briefly synopsized.[10]


## Adaptations
An adaptation of Alas, Babylon was broadcast on April 3, 1960, as the 131st episode of the Playhouse 90 dramatic television series.[11] It starred Don Murray, Burt Reynolds, and Rita Moreno.[12]


## See also
Novels portal
List of nuclear holocaust fiction
Survivalism


## Notes
^ When the novel was published in 1959, only 3 spacecraft labelled Sputnik had been launched. A real craft sequentially dubbed Sputnik 23 by the American press was launched by the Soviet Union in November 1962.


## References
^ Frank, Pat (1979). Alas, Babylon. Illustrated by Hunt, Robert (Paperback ed.). ISBN 0-553-13260-1.
^ Owens, Vivian W. (2000). The Mount Dorans: African American History Notes of a Florida Town. Waynesboro: Eschar.
^ a b c "Alas Babylon Character Descriptions".
^ a b c "Alas, Babylon: Florida Apocalyptic Novel with Timeless Lessons".
^ "Galaxy's 5 Star Shelf". Galaxy Science Fiction. December 1959. p. 150.
^ Kane, Larry (2005). Lennon Revealed. Philadelphia, Pennsylvania: Running Press Book Publishers. pp. 141–142. ISBN 0762423641.
^ Joshi, S. T. (2001). "The Modern Weird Tale". McFarland. p. 80. ISBN 078640986X.
^ Brin, David (2005). "Foreword". Alas, Babylon. Harper Perennial Modern Classics. pp. xi–xii. ISBN 0-06-074187-2.
^ Forstchen, William R. (2009). One Second After. Macmillan. p. 12. ISBN 9780765317582.
^ a b Ringo, John (2013). Under a Graveyard Sky. Baen Publishing Enterprises. p. 11. ISBN 9781625791887.
^ "Playhouse 90 Episode Guide, TV.com". Archived from the original on July 30, 2019. Retrieved May 14, 2017.
^ IMDb "Playhouse 90" Alas, Babylon (1960)


## External links
Alas, Babylon at Faded Page (Canada)
"Pat Frank's 'Alas, Babylon,' 50 years later" in The Florida Times-Union


URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/A_Canticle_for_Leibowitz
Content:

A Canticle for Leibowitz is a post-apocalyptic social science fiction novel by American writer Walter M. Miller Jr., first published in 1959. Set in a Catholic monastery in the desert of the southwestern United States after a devastating nuclear war, the book spans thousands of years as civilization rebuilds itself. The monks of the Albertian Order of Leibowitz preserve the surviving remnants of man's scientific knowledge until the world is again ready for it.
The novel is a fix-up of three short stories Miller published in The Magazine of Fantasy & Science Fiction that were inspired by the author's participation in the bombing of the monastery at the Battle of Monte Cassino during World War II. The book is considered one of the classics of science fiction and has never been out of print. It won the 1961 Hugo Award for best science fiction novel, and its themes of religion, recurrence, and church versus state have generated a significant body of scholarly research. A sequel, Saint Leibowitz and the Wild Horse Woman, was published posthumously in 1997.


## Publication history


### Development
By 1955, Walter M. Miller Jr. had published over 30 science fiction short stories in such magazines as Astounding Science Fiction, Amazing Stories, and Fantastic Adventures.[1] Significant themes of his stories included loss of scientific knowledge or "socio-technological regression and its presumed antithesis, continued technological advance", its preservation through oral transmission, the guardianship of archives by priests, and "that side of [human] behavior which can only be termed religious".[2][3] These thematic elements, combined with the growing subgenre of the "post-disaster" story and Miller's own experiences during World War II, set the stage for the short story that would become the opening section of A Canticle for Leibowitz.[4]
During World War II, Miller served as a radioman and tail gunner in a bomber crew that participated in the destruction of the 6th-century Christian monastery at Monte Cassino, Italy, founded by St. Benedict and recognized as the oldest surviving Christian church in the Western world. This experience impressed him enough to write, a decade later, the short story "A Canticle for Leibowitz", about an order of monks whose abbey springs from the destroyed world around it.[5][6] The story, which would evolve into "Fiat Homo", the first of three parts of the fix-up novel, was published in the April 1955 edition of The Magazine of Fantasy and Science Fiction (F&SF).
Although not originally intended as a serialization, the saga continued in "And the Light Is Risen", which was published in August 1956 (also in F&SF). That work would later grow into "Fiat Lux", the second part of the novel. It was while writing the third story, "The Last Canticle", for magazine publication in February of the following year[7] that Miller realized he was really completing a novel: "Only after I had written the first two and was working on the third did it dawn on me that this isn't three novelettes, it's a novel. And I converted it".[6]
The publication of the three "Canticle" stories,[8] along with Miller's "The Lineman", in F&SF, marked a significant evolution in the writer's craft. Under the editorship of Anthony Boucher, F&SF possessed a reputation for publishing works with "careful writing and characterization". Walker Percy considered the magazine "high-class sci-fi pulp".[9] The appearance of these stories in the magazine is indicative of the direction Miller's writing had taken toward "'human' stories, less crowded with incident, more concerned with values".[3]
A Canticle for Leibowitz was the only novel Miller published during his lifetime.[10] For the fix-up, Miller did not just collate the three short stories. He changed the title and the names of some characters, added new characters, changed the nature and prominence of existing characters, and added Latin passages. These revisions affected the religious and recurrence themes of the story.[3] The Latin phrases in the novel relate to Roman Catholic Church practices, rituals and official communications. Susan Olsen writes that Miller did not include the Latin phrases just to "add dignity" to the work, but to emphasize its religious themes, making it consonant with the tradition of Judeo-Christian writings.[11]
Changing the name of the abbot of the first part from "Father Juan" to "Abbot Arkos" strengthened the cyclical/recurrence motif, since the name of the first abbot encountered, "Arkos", begins with the first letter of the Latin alphabet and the name of the last abbot, "Zerchi", begins with the last letter.[11] Miller also expanded certain scenes, increasing their importance: for instance, the initial encounter between Brother Francis and Abbot Arkos in "Fiat Homo" grew from two pages in the short story to eight pages in the novel. Abbot Arkos was shown to possess doubts and uncertainty, unlike the dogmatism of Father Juan.[11]
Miller also used the adaptation process to add a layer of complexity to the story. Walker Percy recognized this dimension of the novel, which he compared to a "cipher, a coded message, a book in a strange language".[12] David Seed deemed the novel "charged with half-concealed meaning", an intricacy that seems to have been added as Miller was revising the stories for publication as a novel. Decoding messages such as this is an important activity in Miller's works, both in A Canticle for Leibowitz and in his short stories.[2] For example, in the original version of "Fiat Homo", Miller limits his "wordplay" to an explicit symbolism involving the letter "V" and Brother Francis' "Voice/Vocation" during Francis' encounter with the wandering pilgrim. In the novel, however, "Miller reserves such symbolistic cross-references to the more intellectual analysts and builds a comedy of incomprehension around Francis".[2]
Miller's experience in writing for science fiction magazines contributed to his writing of A Canticle for Leibowitz. His background was with the medium lengths of the short story, novelette, and short novel, where he combined character, action, and import. This full-length novel has a tripartite structure: each section is "short novel size, with counterpoint, motifs, and allusions making up for the lack of more ordinary means of continuity".[3]


### Publication
A Canticle for Leibowitz was published by J. B. Lippincott & Co. as a hardcover in 1960 with a 1959 copyright,[13] and two reprints appeared within the first year.[1] More than 40 new editions and reprints have appeared for the book, which has never been out of print. It often appears on "best of" lists, and has been recognized three times with Locus Poll Awards for best all-time science fiction novel.[1][6][10][14]


## Plot summary


### Background
After 20th-century civilization was destroyed by a global nuclear war, known as the "Flame Deluge", there was a violent backlash against the culture of advanced knowledge and technology that had led to the development of nuclear weapons. During this backlash, called the "Simplification", anyone of learning, and eventually anyone who could even read, was likely to be killed by rampaging mobs, who proudly took on the name of "Simpletons". Illiteracy became almost universal, and books were destroyed en masse.
Isaac Edward Leibowitz, a Jewish electrical engineer working for the United States military, survived the war and sought refuge from the mobs of the "Simplification" in the sanctuary of a Cistercian monastery, all the while surreptitiously searching for his wife, from whom he had become separated in the war. Eventually concluding that his wife was dead, he joined the monastery, took holy orders (becoming a priest), and dedicated his life to preserving knowledge by hiding books, smuggling them to safety (known as "booklegging"), memorizing, and copying them. He approached the Church for permission to found a new monastic order dedicated to this purpose. With permission granted, he founded his new order in the desert of the American Southwest, where it became known as the "Albertian Order of Leibowitz". The Order's abbey is located in a remote desert in New Mexico, possibly near the military base where Leibowitz worked before the war, on an old road that may have been "a portion of the shortest route from the Great Salt Lake to Old El Paso". Leibowitz was eventually betrayed and martyred. Later beatified by the Roman Catholic Church, he became a candidate for sainthood.
Six hundred years after his death, the abbey still preserves the "Memorabilia", the collected writings and artifacts of 20th-century civilization that survived the Flame Deluge and the Simplification, in the hope that they will help future generations reclaim forgotten science.
The story is structured in three parts: "Fiat Homo", "Fiat Lux", and "Fiat Voluntas Tua". The parts are separated by periods of six centuries each.


### Fiat Homo("Let There Be Man")
In the 26th century, a 17-year-old novice named Brother Francis Gerard of Utah is on a vigil in a New Mexico desert. While searching for a rock to complete a shelter from the desert wolves, Brother Francis encounters a vagrant Wanderer, apparently looking for the abbey, who inscribes Hebrew on a rock that appears to be the perfect fit for the shelter. When Brother Francis picks up the rock, he discovers the entrance to an ancient fallout shelter[a] containing "relics", such as handwritten notes on crumbling memo pads bearing cryptic texts resembling a 20th-century shopping list.[b] He soon realizes that these notes appear to have been written by Leibowitz, his order's founder. The discovery of the ancient documents causes an uproar at the monastery, as the other monks speculate that the relics once belonged to Leibowitz. Brother Francis's account of the Wanderer, who ultimately never turned up at the abbey, is also greatly embellished by the other monks amid rumours that he was an apparition of Leibowitz himself; Francis strenuously denies the embellishments, but equally persistently refuses to deny that the encounter occurred, despite the lack of other witnesses. Abbot Arkos, the head of the monastery, worries that the discovery of so many potentially holy relics in such a short period may cause delays in Leibowitz's canonization process. Francis is banished back to the desert to complete his vigil and defuse the sensationalism.
Many years later, the abbey is visited by Monsignors Aguerra (God's Advocate) and Flaught (the Devil's Advocate), the Church's investigators in the case for Leibowitz's sainthood. Leibowitz is eventually canonized as Saint Leibowitz – based partly on the evidence Francis discovered in the shelter – and Brother Francis is sent to New Rome to represent the Order at the canonization Mass. He brings with him the documents found in the shelter, and an illumination of one of the documents on which he has spent years working, as a gift to the Pope.
En route, he is robbed by "The Pope's Children" – an ironic name for outcast genetic mutants who are the descendants of fallout victims – and his illumination is taken, though he negotiates with the robbers to keep the original blueprint on which the illuminated copy was based. The robbers believe the gold-inlaid copy is the original and the blueprint the worthless copy. Francis completes the journey to New Rome and is granted an audience with the Pope.[c] Francis presents the Pope with the remaining blueprint, and the Pope comforts Francis with the notion that the fifteen years he spent creating the illumination were not rendered a waste by the theft, but rather were essential in protecting the original relic. The Pope also aids Francis by giving him gold with which to ransom back the illumination; however, Francis is killed during his return trip by the Pope's Children, receiving an arrow between the eyes, just after he spots the approach of the Wanderer in the distance. The Wanderer discovers and buries Francis's body. The narrative then focuses on the buzzards who were denied their meal by the burial; they fly over the Great Plains and find much food near the Red River until a city-state, based in Texarkana, rises.


### Fiat Lux("Let There Be Light")
In 3174, the Albertian Order of Saint Leibowitz is still preserving the half-understood knowledge from before the Flame Deluge and the subsequent Age of Simplification. The new Dark Age is ending, however, and a new Renaissance is beginning. Thon Taddeo Pfardentrott, a highly regarded secular scholar, is sent by his cousin Hannegan, Mayor of Texarkana, to the abbey. Thon Taddeo, frequently compared to Galileo, is interested in the Order's preserved collection of Memorabilia.
At the abbey, Brother Kornhoer, a talented engineer, has just finished work on a "generator of electrical essences", a treadmill-powered electrical generator that powers an arc lamp. He gives credit for the generator to work done by Thon Taddeo. Arriving at the monastery, Thon Taddeo immediately recognizes the significance of Brother Kornhoer's pioneering work. By studying the Memorabilia, Thon Taddeo makes several major "discoveries", and asks the abbot to allow the Memorabilia to be removed to Texarkana. The Abbot Dom Paulo refuses, offering to allow Thon Taddeo to continue his research at the abbey instead. Before departing, the Thon comments that it could take decades to finish analyzing the Memorabilia.
The Wanderer, now called Benjamin, has settled down as a hermit within sight of the abbey, and has struck up a relationship with the abbot. Before Thon Taddeo departs, Benjamin visits the abbey to meet the Thon, to see if he is the long-awaited Messiah.
Meanwhile, Hannegan makes an alliance with the kingdom of Laredo and the neighboring, relatively civilized city-states against the threat of attack from nomadic warriors living on the plains. Hannegan, however, is secretly manipulating the regional politics to effectively neutralize all of his enemies, leaving him in control of the entire region. Monsignor Apollo, the papal nuncio to Hannegan's court, sends word to New Rome that Hannegan intends to attack the Empire of Denver next, and that he intends to use the abbey as a base of operations from which to conduct the campaign. For his actions, Apollo is executed, and Hannegan initiates a church schism, declaring loyalty to the Pope to be punishable by death. The Church excommunicates Hannegan.


### Fiat Voluntas Tua("Thy Will Be Done")
In the year 3781, mankind has emerged into a new technological age, and now possesses nuclear energy and weapons again, as well as starships and extrasolar colonies. Two world superpowers, the Asian Coalition and the Atlantic Confederacy, have been embroiled in a cold war for 50 years. The Leibowitzian Order's mission of preserving the Memorabilia has expanded to the preservation of all knowledge.
Rumors that both sides are assembling nuclear weapons in space, and that a nuclear weapon has been detonated, increase public and international tensions. At the abbey, the current abbot, Dom Jethras Zerchi, recommends to New Rome that the Church reactivate the Quo peregrinatur grex pastor secum ("Whither wanders the flock, the shepherd is with them"), a contingency plan in the case of another global apocalypse which involves "certain (spacefaring) vehicles" the Church has had since 3756. A "nuclear incident" occurs in the Asian Coalition city of Itu Wan: an underground nuclear explosion has destroyed the city, and the Atlantic Confederacy counters by firing a "warning shot" over the South Pacific. Rumors swirl about whether the city's devastation was deliberate or accidental.
New Rome tells Zerchi to proceed with Quo peregrinatur, and to plan for departure within three days. He appoints Brother Joshua as mission leader, telling him that the mission is an emergency plan for perpetuating the Church on extrasolar colony planets in the event of a nuclear war on Earth. The Order's Memorabilia will also accompany the mission. That night the Atlantic Confederacy launches an assault against Asian Coalition space platforms. The Asian Coalition responds by using a nuclear weapon against the Confederacy capital city of Texarkana, which kills millions of people. A ten-day cease-fire is issued by the World Court. The Wanderer reappears at the rectory, at the last meal before Brother Joshua and the space-trained monks and priests depart on a secret chartered flight for New Rome, hoping to leave Earth on the starship before the cease-fire ends.
During the cease-fire, the abbey offers shelter to refugees fleeing the regions affected by fallout, which results in a battle of wills over the euthanasia of hopelessly irradiated refugees between the abbot and a doctor from a government emergency response camp. The war resumes, and a nuclear explosion occurs near the abbey. Abbot Zerchi tries to flee to safety, bringing with him the abbey's ciborium containing consecrated hosts, but it is too late. He is trapped by the falling walls of the abbey and finds himself lying under tons of rock and bones as the abbey's ancient crypts disgorge their contents. Among them is a skull with an arrow hole in its forehead (presumably that of Brother Francis Gerard from the first section of the book).
As he lies dying under the abbey's rubble, Zerchi is startled to encounter Mrs. Grales/Rachel, a tomato peddler and two-headed mutant. However, Mrs. Grales has been rendered unconscious by the explosion, and appears to be dying herself. As Zerchi tries to conditionally baptize Rachel, she refuses, and instead takes the ciborium and administers the Eucharist to him. It is implied that she is, like the Virgin Mary, exempt from original sin. Zerchi soon dies, having witnessed an apparent miracle.
After the abbot's death, the scene briefly flashes to Joshua and the Quo peregrinatur crew, who are preparing to launch as the nuclear explosions begin. Joshua, the last crew member to board the starship, knocks the dirt from his sandals (a reference to Matthew 10:14, "If anyone will not welcome you or listen to your words, leave that home or town and shake the dust off your feet"), murmuring "Sic transit mundus" ("Thus passes the world", a play on the phrase sic transit gloria mundi, "thus passes the glory of the world").
As a coda, a final vignette depicts the ecological aspects of the war: seabirds and fish succumb to the poisonous fallout, and a shark evades death only by moving to particularly deep water, where, it is noted, the shark was "very hungry that season".


## Major themes


### Recurrence and cyclical history
Scholars and critics have noted the theme of cyclic history or recurrence in Miller's works, epitomized in A Canticle for Leibowitz. David Seed, in discussing the treatment of nuclear holocaust in science fiction in his book American Science Fiction and the Cold War: Literature and Film (1992), states, "it was left to Walter M. Miller's A Canticle for Leibowitz to show recurrence taking place in a narrative spanning centuries".[15] David N. Samuelson, whose 1969 doctoral dissertation is considered the "best overall discussion" of the book, calls the "cyclical theme of technological progress and regress ... the foundation-stone on which A Canticle for Leibowitz is built".[3][6]
The story's circular structure – and the cyclical history it presents – support a number of thematic and structural elements which unify its three sections. Although the novel's events take place in a fictional future, the three parts allegorically represent crucial phases of Western history. The first section, "Fiat Homo", depicts a Church preserving civilization, a counterpart to the "Age of Faith" after the Fall of Rome. The action of the second part, "Fiat Lux", focuses on a renaissance of "secular learning", echoing the "divergences of Church and State and of science and faith". "Fiat Voluntas Tua", the final part, is the analog of contemporary civilization, with its "technological marvels, its obsessions with material, worldly power, and its accelerating neglect of faith and the spirit".[16]
In her analysis of Miller's fiction, Rose Secrest connects this theme directly to one of Miller's earlier short fiction works, quoting a passage from "The Ties that Bind", published in the May 1954 edition of If magazine: "All societies go through three phases.... First there is the struggle to integrate in a hostile environment. Then, after integration, comes an explosive expansion of the culture-conquest.... Then a withering of the mother culture, and the rebellious rise of young cultures".[17]


### Church versus state
The third part, "Fiat Voluntas Tua", includes a debate between future Church and state stances on abortion and euthanasia, a thematic issue representative of the larger conflict between Church and state.[18] Literary critic Edward Ducharme claimed that "Miller's narrative continually returns to the conflicts between the scientist's search for truth and the state's power".[19]


## Literary significance and reception
Initial response to the novel was mixed, but it drew responses from newspapers and magazines normally inattentive to science fiction. A Canticle for Leibowitz was reviewed in such notable publications as Time, The New Yorker, The New York Times Book Review, and The Spectator.[16] While The New Yorker was negative – calling Miller a "dull, ashy writer guilty of heavy-weight irony"[20] – The Spectator's was mixed. Also unimpressed, Time said, "Miller proves himself chillingly effective at communicating a kind of post-human lunar landscape of disaster", but dubbed it intellectually lightweight.[21] The New York Times Book Review's Martin Levin, however, hailed the work as an "ingenious fantasy".[22] The Chicago Tribune gave the book unusual exposure outside the genre in a front-page review in the Chicago Tribune Magazine of Books, reviewer Edmund Fuller calling the book "an extraordinary novel".[23] Rating it five stars out of five, Floyd C. Gale of Galaxy Science Fiction said that "It has many passages of remarkable power and deserves the widest possible audience".[24] A decade later, Time re-characterized its opinion of the book, calling it "an extraordinary novel even by literary standards, [which] has flourished by word of mouth for a dozen years".[25] After criticizing unrealistic science fiction, Carl Sagan in 1978 listed A Canticle for Leibowitz as among stories "that are so tautly constructed, so rich in the accommodating details of an unfamiliar society that they sweep me along before I have even a chance to be critical".[26]
A Canticle for Leibowitz was an early example of a genre story becoming a mainstream best-seller after large publishers entered the science-fiction market.[27] In 1961 it was awarded the Hugo Award for Best Novel by The World Science Fiction Convention.[1] In the years since, praise for the work has been consistently high. It is considered a "science-fiction classic ... [and] is arguably the best novel written about nuclear apocalypse, surpassing more popularly known books like On the Beach".[28] The book has also generated a significant body of literary criticism, including numerous literature journal articles, books and college courses.[29] Acknowledging its serialization roots, literary critic David N. Samuelson writes that the novel "may be the one universally acknowledged literary masterpiece to emerge from magazine SF".[30] Fellow critic David Cowart places the novel in the realm of works by Evelyn Waugh, Graham Greene, and Walker Percy, in 1975 stating it "stands for many readers as the best novel ever written in the genre".[31] Percy, a National Book Award recipient, declared the book "a mystery: it's as if everything came together by some felicitous chance, then fell apart into normal negative entropy. I'm as mystified as ever and hold 'Canticle' in even higher esteem".[32] Scholars and critics have explored the many themes encompassed in the novel, frequently focusing on its motifs of religion, recurrence, and church versus state.[33]
The novel has also had a notable influence on popular culture, particularly in the realm of video games. A Canticle for Leibowitz is cited by Tim Cain, one of the original creators of the Fallout series, as an inspiration for the game's post-apocalyptic setting and themes. In a 2023 video, Cain discusses how the novel's depiction of a world rebuilding after nuclear devastation helped shape the tone and world-building of Fallout.[34] Within the Fallout universe, the Brotherhood of Steel, a techno-religious faction in the series devoted to preserving and controlling advanced technology, was partly inspired by the monastic order in A Canticle for Leibowitz, which safeguards scientific knowledge in the aftermath of nuclear war.[35]


## Adaptations
A 15-part full-cast abridged serial of the novel was adapted for radio by John Reeves[36] and broadcast in 1981[37] by National Public Radio. The serial was directed by Karl Schmidt and was produced by Schmidt with Marv Nonn. Carol Cowan narrated the production.[38][39]
In 1992, BBC Radio 4 broadcast a 90-minute dramatization of the first two parts, "Fiat Homo" and "Fiat Lux", with Andrew Price as Brother Francis and Michael McKenzie as Dom Paulo. The adaptation was by Donald Campbell and was directed by Hamish Wilson.[40]
A 2012 radio adaptation of "Fiat Homo, Part One of A Canticle For Leibowitz" read by Nigel Lindsay, abridged by Nick McCarty and produced by Philippa Geering for BBC Radio 4 Extra, was broadcast in five 30-minute parts.[41]


## Sequel
Toward the end of his life, Miller wrote another installment of the Abbey of Saint Leibowitz saga, Saint Leibowitz and the Wild Horse Woman.[7] A full-length novel (455 pages) significantly longer than its predecessor, it is set in AD 3254, eighty years after the events of "Fiat Lux" but several centuries before "Fiat Voluntas Tua". Suffering from writer's block and fearful the new work would go unfinished, Miller arranged with author Terry Bisson to complete it. Bisson said all he did was go in and tie up the loose ends Miller had left.[42] The novel tells the story of Brother Blacktooth St. George of the Leibowitzian abbey who, unlike Brother Francis, wants to be released from his holy vows and leave the abbey. In addition to recounting his travels as Cardinal Brownpony's personal secretary, the book describes the political situation in the 33rd century as the Church and the Texark Empire vie for power. Miller died before the novel's publication.[42]
Saint Leibowitz and the Wild Horse Woman has been called "Walter Miller's other novel". Reviewer Steven H. Silver points out that this "is not to say that Saint Leibowitz and the Wild Horse Woman does not deserve to be read. It is a fantastic novel, only suffering in comparison to Miller's earlier work".[43]


## Notes
^ Brother Francis believes that "a Fallout" is some variety of ancient monster, which he imagines as being half-salamander and half-incubus, and he thinks that the shelter was home to fifteen Fallouts, due to the sign on its entrance.
^ Other relics include an electrical engineering blueprint with Leibowitz's name on it, and the skull of wife Emily Leibowitz, who was apparently caught in the outer chamber of the shelter when the bombs fell.
^ The Pope was modeled after Pope John XXIII.


## References
^ a b c d "Bibliography: A Canticle for Leibowitz". The Internet Speculative Fiction Database. 2007. Retrieved December 2, 2007.
^ a b c Seed, David (Fall 1996). "Recycling the texts of the culture: Walter M. Miller's 'A Canticle for Leibowitz". Extrapolation. 37 (3). Kent State University Press: 257–71. doi:10.3828/extr.1996.37.3.257.
^ a b c d e Samuelson, David N. (March 1976). "The Lost Canticles of Walter M. Miller, Jr". Science-Fiction Studies. 3 (26). DePauw University: 3–26. JSTOR 4238992.
^ "A Canticle for Leibowitz falls into a well-known subgenre of science fiction, the 'post-disaster' story, like John Wyndham's The Chrysalids (1955), Algis Budrys's Some Will Not Die (1961), and many more. The use of nuclear weapons to end World War II naturally set many writers speculating on the possibilities of future war, mutation, and rebirth". Shippey, T.A. (2000). "A Canticle for Leibowitz". Masterplots II: American Fiction Series, Revised Edition. Salem Press.
^ Garvey, John (April 5, 1996). "A Canticle for Leibowitz: A Eulogy for Walt Miller". Commonweal. 123 (7). Commonweal Foundation: 7–8. I went to war with very romantic ideas about war, and I came back sick.
^ a b c d Roberson, Williams H.; Battenfeld, Robert L. (June 30, 1992). Walter M. Miller, Jr.: A Bio-Bibliography. Bio-Bibliographies in American Literature. Westport, CT: Greenwood Press. ISBN 978-0-313-27651-4.
^ a b Saint Leibowitz series listing at the Internet Speculative Fiction Database (ISFDB). Retrieved 2012-06-11.
^ ISFDB catalogs them as a novelette and two novellas, which are defined by word counts 7,500–17,500 and 17,500–40,000, respectively; shorter and longer works are short stories and novels.
^ Percy, Walker (1991). "Rediscovering A Canticle for Leibowitz". Signposts in a Strange Land. Farrar, Straus and Giroux: 227. ISBN 0-312-25419-9.
^ a b Webley, Kayla (June 7, 2010). "Top Ten Post-Apocalyptic Books: A Canticle for Leibowitz". Time.
^ a b c Olsen, Alexandra H. (Summer 1997). "Re-Vision: A Comparison of A Canticle for Leibowitz and the Novellas Originally Published". Extrapolation. 38 (2). Kent State University Press: 135. doi:10.3828/extr.1997.38.2.135.
^ Percy, Walker (1971). "Walker Percy on Walter M. Miller, Jr.'s A Canticle for Leibowitz". Rediscoveries. Crown Publishers.
^ Miller, W. M. Jr. (1960). A canticle for Leibowitz; a novel. J.B. Lippincott Co. OCLC 1451434.
^ "A Science-Fiction Classic Still Smolders". The New Yorker. October 22, 2014. Retrieved March 15, 2017.
^ Seed, David (1999). "XI The Signs of War: Walter M. Miller and Russell Hoban". American Science Fiction and the Cold War: Literature and Film. Routledge. p. 158. ISBN 978-1-57958-195-4.
^ a b Cowart, David; Wyner, Thomas L. (1981). "Miller Bio-Bibliography". Dictionary of Literary Biography. Vol. 8: Twentieth-Century American Science-Fiction Writers. The Gale Group. pp. 19–30.
^ Secrest, Rose (June 28, 2002). Glorificemus: A Study of the Fiction of Walter M. Miller, Jr. Lanham, Maryland: University Press of America. p. 47. ISBN 978-0-7618-2257-8.
^ Rowland, Stanley J. (May 25, 1960). "With Moral Passion". The Christian Century. LXXVII (21): 640–1.
^ Ducharme, Edward (November 1966). "A Canticle for Miller". English Journal. 55 (8). National Council of Teachers of English: 1042–4. doi:10.2307/812735. JSTOR 812735.
^ "A Canticle for Leibowitz". The New Yorker. Vol. 36. April 2, 1960. p. 156.
^ "Mixed Fiction". Time. February 22, 1960. Archived from the original on February 6, 2009. Author Miller proves himself chillingly effective at communicating a kind of post-human lunar landscape of disaster. His faith in religious faith is commendable but not compelling. It is difficult to tell whether he believes that better bomb shelters or more Roman Catholics are the hope of the world. On the flyleaf of Canticle for Leibowitz, Novelist Miller writes, "A dedication is only a scratch where it itches." Intellectually speaking, so is his book.
^ Levin, Martin (March 27, 1960). "Incubator of the New Civilization; A Canticle for Leibowitz". The New York Times. pp. BR42 (Book Review).
^ Fuller, Edmund (March 6, 1960). "An Extraordinary Tale Speculating on Man's Destiny". Chicago Tribune. pp. B1.
^ "Galaxy's 5 Star Shelf", Galaxy Science Fiction, February 1961, p.139
^ Sheppard, R.Z. (March 29, 1971). "Future Grok". Time. Time, Inc. Archived from the original on February 6, 2009. Retrieved June 21, 2008.
^ Sagan, Carl (May 28, 1978). "Growing up with Science Fiction". The New York Times. p. SM7. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved December 12, 2018.
^ Latham, Rob (2009). "Fiction, 1950-1963". In Bould, Mark; Butler, Andrew M.; Roberts, Adam; Vint, Sherryl (eds.). The Routledge Companion to Science Fiction. Routledge. pp. 80–89. ISBN 9781135228361.
^ Rosenberg, Paul (November 20, 1997). "Apocalypse Avoided, Revisited". The Christian Science Monitor.
^ "The Infography about Walter Miller, Jr. (1923–1996)". Fields of Knowledge. 2007. Retrieved December 9, 2007.
^ Samuelson, David N. (1981). "Twentieth Century American Science-Fiction Writers". Dictionary of Literary Biography. 8. Gale.
^ Cowart, David (1975). "A Canticle for Leibowitz". Contemporary Literary Criticism. The Gale Group. Unfortunately, it is little known outside science-fiction circles, even though it compares favorably with the work of such mainstream Catholic writers as François Mauriac, Graham Greene, Evelyn Waugh, and Walker Percy.
^ Garvey, John (April 5, 1996). "A Canticle for Leibowitz: A Eulogy for Walt Miller". Commonweal. 123 (7). Commonweal Foundation: 8.
^ Shippey, T.A. (2000). "A Canticle for Leibowitz". Masterplots II: American Fiction Series, Revised Edition. Salem Press.
^ Cain, Tim (June 15, 2023). "Tim Cain on Fallout, storytelling, and making a great role-playing game". YouTube. Retrieved June 9, 2025.
^ "The Untold Truth Of Fallout's Brotherhood Of Steel". SVG. Retrieved June 9, 2025.
^ Davidson, Randall (2006). 9XM Talking: WHA Radio and the Wisconsin Idea. University of Wisconsin Press. p. 296. ISBN 978-0299218706.
^ "NPR Presents, A Canticle for Leibowitz". Internet Archive. 1981. Retrieved November 15, 2023.
^ "A Canticle for Leibowitz (Log)". Old Time Radio. Retrieved December 25, 2010.
^ "Crazy Dog Audio Theatre Masterpiece Gallery". Crazy Dog Audio Theatre - crazydogaudiotheatre.com. Archived from the original on March 10, 2010. Retrieved January 12, 2010.
^ "BBC Programme Index – Saturday Playhouse, Sat 6th Jun 1992 – A Canticle for Leibowitz by Walter M Miller Jr". BBC Programme Index. June 6, 1992. Retrieved September 22, 2022.
^ BBC Radio 4 Extra - Fiat Homo, Part One Of A Canticle For Leibowitz on the BBC website
^ a b Bisson, Terry (1998). "A Canticle for Miller; or, How I Met Saint Leibowitz and the Wild Horse Woman but not Walter M. Miller, Jr". SFF. Archived from the original on September 30, 2007. Retrieved June 3, 2007.
^ Silver, Steven H. (2007). "Saint Leibowitz and the Wild Horse Woman". SF Site. Archived from the original on December 19, 2007. Retrieved December 5, 2007.


## Sources
Roberson, Williams H.; Battenfeld, Robert L. (June 30, 1992). Walter M. Miller, Jr.: A Bio-Bibliography. Bio-Bibliographies in American Literature. Westport, CT: Greenwood Press. ISBN 978-0-313-27651-4.
Wagner, Thomas M. (2005). "A Canticle for Leibowitz". SF Reviews.net. Archived from the original on June 3, 2007. Retrieved June 3, 2007.


## External links
A Canticle for Leibowitz title listing at the Internet Speculative Fiction Database
A Canticle for Leibowitz at Open Library
A Canticle for Leibowitz parts one, two, and three on the Internet Archive
v
t
e
"Dark Benediction" (1951)
"The Darfsteller" (1955)
A Canticle for Leibowitz (1960)
Saint Leibowitz and the Wild Horse Woman (1997)
v
t
e
The Sword in the Stone by T. H. White (1939)
Slan by A. E. van Vogt (1941)
Beyond This Horizon by Anson MacDonald (1943)
Conjure Wife by Fritz Leiber (1944)
Shadow Over Mars by Leigh Brackett (1945)
The Mule by Isaac Asimov (1946)
Farmer in the Sky by Robert A. Heinlein (1951)
Fahrenheit 451 by Ray Bradbury (1954)
The Demolished Man by Alfred Bester (1953)
They'd Rather Be Right (aka: The Forever Machine) by Mark Clifton and Frank Riley (1955)
Double Star by Robert A. Heinlein (1956)
The Big Time by Fritz Leiber (1958)
A Case of Conscience by James Blish (1959)
Starship Troopers by Robert A. Heinlein (1960)
A Canticle for Leibowitz by Walter M. Miller, Jr. (1961)
Stranger in a Strange Land by Robert A. Heinlein (1962)
The Man in the High Castle by Philip K. Dick (1963)
Here Gather the Stars (aka: Way Station) by Clifford D. Simak (1964)
The Wanderer by Fritz Leiber (1965)
Dune by Frank Herbert / ...And Call Me Conrad (aka: This Immortal) by Roger Zelazny (1966)
The Moon Is a Harsh Mistress by Robert A. Heinlein (1967)
Lord of Light by Roger Zelazny (1968)
Stand on Zanzibar by John Brunner (1969)
The Left Hand of Darkness by Ursula K. Le Guin (1970)
Ringworld by Larry Niven (1971)
To Your Scattered Bodies Go by Philip José Farmer (1972)
The Gods Themselves by Isaac Asimov (1973)
Rendezvous with Rama by Arthur C. Clarke (1974)
The Dispossessed by Ursula K. Le Guin (1975)
The Forever War by Joe Haldeman (1976)
Where Late the Sweet Birds Sang by Kate Wilhelm (1977)
Gateway by Frederik Pohl (1978)
Dreamsnake by Vonda N. McIntyre (1979)
The Fountains of Paradise by Arthur C. Clarke (1980)
The Snow Queen by Joan D. Vinge (1981)
Downbelow Station by C. J. Cherryh (1982)
Foundation's Edge by Isaac Asimov (1983)
Startide Rising by David Brin (1984)
Neuromancer by William Gibson (1985)
Ender's Game by Orson Scott Card (1986)
Speaker for the Dead by Orson Scott Card (1987)
The Uplift War by David Brin (1988)
Cyteen by C. J. Cherryh (1989)
Hyperion by Dan Simmons (1990)
The Vor Game by Lois McMaster Bujold (1991)
Barrayar by Lois McMaster Bujold (1992)
A Fire Upon the Deep by Vernor Vinge / Doomsday Book by Connie Willis (1993)
Green Mars by Kim Stanley Robinson (1994)
Mirror Dance by Lois McMaster Bujold (1995)
The Diamond Age by Neal Stephenson (1996)
Blue Mars by Kim Stanley Robinson (1997)
Forever Peace by Joe Haldeman (1998)
To Say Nothing of the Dog by Connie Willis (1999)
A Deepness in the Sky by Vernor Vinge (2000)
Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire by J. K. Rowling (2001)
American Gods by Neil Gaiman (2002)
Hominids by Robert J. Sawyer (2003)
Paladin of Souls by Lois McMaster Bujold (2004)
Jonathan Strange & Mr Norrell by Susanna Clarke (2005)
Spin by Robert Charles Wilson (2006)
Rainbows End by Vernor Vinge (2007)
The Yiddish Policemen's Union by Michael Chabon (2008)
The Graveyard Book by Neil Gaiman (2009)
The Windup Girl by Paolo Bacigalupi / The City & the City by China Miéville (2010)
Blackout/All Clear by Connie Willis (2011)
Among Others by Jo Walton (2012)
Redshirts by John Scalzi (2013)
Ancillary Justice by Ann Leckie (2014)
The Three-Body Problem by Cixin Liu, translated by Ken Liu (2015)
The Fifth Season by N. K. Jemisin (2016)
The Obelisk Gate by N. K. Jemisin (2017)
The Stone Sky by N. K. Jemisin (2018)
The Calculating Stars by Mary Robinette Kowal (2019)
A Memory Called Empire by Arkady Martine (2020)
Network Effect by Martha Wells (2021)
A Desolation Called Peace by Arkady Martine (2022)
Nettle & Bone by T. Kingfisher (2023)
Some Desperate Glory by Emily Tesh (2024)


URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Sirens_of_Titan
Content:

The Sirens of Titan is a comic science fiction novel by Kurt Vonnegut Jr., first published in 1959. His second novel, it involves issues of free will, omniscience, and the overall purpose of human history, with much of the story revolving around a Martian invasion of Earth.


## Plot
This novel begins with an omniscient comment: "Everyone now knows how to find the meaning of life within himself. But mankind wasn't always so lucky."
Malachi Constant is the richest man in a future North America. He possesses extraordinary luck that he attributes to divine favor which he has used to build upon his father's fortune. He becomes the centerpoint of a journey that takes him from Earth to Mars in preparation for an interplanetary war, to Mercury with another Martian survivor of that war, back to Earth to be pilloried as a sign of Man's displeasure with his arrogance, and finally to Titan where he again meets the man ostensibly responsible for the turn of events that have befallen him, Winston Niles Rumfoord.
Rumfoord comes from a wealthy New England background. His private fortune was large enough to fund the construction of a personal spacecraft, and he became a space explorer. Traveling between Earth and Mars, his ship—carrying Rumfoord and his dog, Kazak—entered a phenomenon known as a chrono-synclastic infundibulum, which is defined in the novel as "those places ... where all the different kinds of truths fit together". When they enter the infundibulum, Rumfoord and Kazak become "wave phenomena", somewhat akin to the probability waves encountered in quantum mechanics. They exist along a spiral stretching from the Sun to the star Betelgeuse. When a planet, such as the Earth, intersects their spiral, Rumfoord and Kazak materialize, temporarily, on that planet.
When he entered the chrono-synclastic infundibulum, Rumfoord became aware of the past and future. Throughout the novel, he predicts events; unless he is deliberately lying, the predictions come true. It is in this state that Rumfoord established the "Church of God the Utterly Indifferent" on Earth to unite the planet after a Martian invasion. It is also in this state that Rumfoord, materializing on different planets, instigated the Martian invasion, which was designed to fail spectacularly. On Titan, the only place where he can exist permanently as a solid human being, Rumfoord befriends a traveller from Tralfamadore (a world that also figures in Vonnegut's novel Slaughterhouse-Five, among others) who needs a small metal component to repair his damaged spaceship.
Salo, the Tralfamadorian explorer, is a robot built millennia earlier to carry a message to a distant galaxy. His spacecraft is powered by the Universal Will to Become or UWTB, the "prime mover" which makes matter and organization wish to appear out of nothingness. (UWTB, Vonnegut informs the reader, was responsible for the Universe in the first place and is the greatest imaginable power source). A small component on Salo's spacecraft breaks and strands him here in the Solar System for over 200 millennia. He requests help from Tralfamadore, and his fellow Tralfamadorians respond by manipulating human history so that primitive humans evolve and create a civilization in order to produce the replacement part. Rumfoord's encounter with the chrono-synclastic infundibulum, the following war with Mars and Constant's exile to Titan were manipulated via the Tralfamadorians' control of the UWTB. Stonehenge, the Great Wall of China and the Kremlin are all messages in the Tralfamadorian geometrical language, informing Salo of their progress.
As it turns out, the replacement part is a small metal strip, brought to Salo by Constant and his son Chrono (born of Rumfoord's ex-wife). A sunspot disrupts Rumfoord's spiral, sending him and Kazak separately into the vastness of space. An argument between Rumfoord and Salo moments before concerning the contents of Salo's message, left unresolved because of Rumfoord's disappearance, leads the distraught Salo to disassemble himself, thereby stranding the humans on Titan. It is revealed that the message was a single dot, meaning "Greetings" in Tralfamadorian. Chrono chooses to live among the Titanian birds; after thirty-two years, his mother dies and Constant manages to reassemble Salo. Using the part delivered so many years previously by Chrono, Constant repairs the Tralfamadorian saucer. Salo wishes to place the aging Constant at a shuffleboard court, but Constant insists on being dropped off in Indianapolis, where he dies of exposure in the wintertime while awaiting an overdue city bus. As he passes away, he experiences a pleasant hallucination secretly implanted in his mind by a compassionate Salo.


## Major themes
The Sirens of Titan largely deals with questions of free will, with multiple characters being stripped of it and the revelation that humanity had been secretly manipulated for millennia for an inane purpose, playing major roles in the story. Free will and the lack thereof became major themes in Vonnegut's later novels, especially Slaughterhouse-Five (1969) and Breakfast of Champions (1972).[1] More broadly speaking, lack of agency has been a hallmark of Vonnegut's novels, with the protagonists struggling against forces they can never overcome and often can't comprehend. None of the characters in The Sirens of Titan have chosen to be in their position, but are driven by forces and wills beside their own, and can do no more than try to make the best of it. At the end of the book Constant concludes, "A purpose of human life, no matter who is controlling it, is to love whoever is around to be loved."


## Style
The novel is simple in syntax and sentence structure, part of Vonnegut's signature style. Likewise, irony, sentimentality, black humor, and didacticism are prevalent throughout the novel.[2]


## Background
According to The Harvard Crimson, Vonnegut "put together the whole of The Sirens of Titan ... in one night ... [H]e was at a party where someone told him he ought to write another novel. So they went into the next room where he just verbally pieced together this book from the things that were around in his mind."[3]


## Reception
Floyd C. Gale of Galaxy Science Fiction in 1961 rated The Sirens of Titan 4.5 stars out of five, stating that "The plot is tangled, intricate and tortuous" but "the book, though exasperating, is a joy of inventiveness".[4] It was a finalist for the 1960 Hugo Award for Best Novel.[5]
William Deresiewicz, in a 2012 retrospective published after a second Library of America collection of Vonnegut's work was released, wrote:[6]
Artistically, though, [Player Piano] is apprentice work—clunky, clumsy, overstuffed. Turn the page to The Sirens of Titan (1959), however, and it's all there, all at once. Kurt Vonnegut has become Kurt Vonnegut. The spareness hits you first. The first page contains fourteen paragraphs, none of them longer than two sentences, some of them as short as five words. It's like he's placing pieces on a game board—so, and so, and so. The story moves from one intensely spotlit moment to the next, one idea to the next, without delay or filler. The prose is equally efficient, with a scalding syncopated wit: "'I told her that you and she were to be married on Mars.' He shrugged. 'Not married exactly—' he said, 'but bred by the Martians—like farm animals.'"


## Publishing history
In 2000 or early 2001, RosettaBooks, an independent e-book publisher, contracted with Vonnegut to publish e-book editions of several of his novels, including The Sirens of Titan.[7] Random House sued RosettaBooks in February 2001, claiming (with respect to Vonnegut) that the contracts he signed with (predecessor-in-interest) Dell in 1967 and 1970 granted Random House e-book publishing rights as well. In July 2001, Judge Sidney H. Stein denied Random House's request for an injunction; in December 2002, Random House and Rosetta Books settled out-of-court, with RosettaBooks retaining the publishing rights that Random House had challenged.[8]
In 2009, Audible.com produced an audio version of The Sirens of Titan, narrated by Jay Snyder, as part of its Modern Vanguard line of audiobooks.


## Adaptations
In the 1970s, the Organic Theatre Company presented Sirens, a stage adaptation of The Sirens of Titan, designed by James Maronek and directed by Stuart Gordon, the company's founder; it used "a simple set, a few pieces of furniture and a white backdrop curtain as a space-time warp".[9] It was staged in October 1977 at the University of California, San Diego. Gordon's adaptation was produced again 40 years later in 2017 at Los Angeles' Sacred Fools Theater Company, this time directed by film and theater director Ben Rock, with the adaptation newly updated by Gordon.[10][11] Also, in the early 1970s, Central Michigan University (Mt. Pleasant, MI) staged a production of "The Sirens Of Titan" under the direction of Professor Elbert Bowen, featuring Terry O'Quinn in the role of Malachi Constant.
Vonnegut sold the film rights to Sirens of Titan to Jerry Garcia, guitarist and vocalist for rock band The Grateful Dead. Garcia began working with Tom Davis in early December 1983[12] and finished their first draft in January 1985.[13] Garcia commented on the book and the screenplay in a November 1987 interview:[14]
There's really three basic characters that are having things happen to them. Three main characters. [Malachi,] Rumfoord, and Bee. It's like a triangle, a complex, convoluted love story. And it's really that simple... So our task has been to take the essential dramatic relationships, make it playable for actors, so that it's free from the Big Picture emphasis of the book. There's also some extremely lovely, touching moments in the book. It's one of the few Vonnegut books that's really sweet, in parts of it, and it has some really lovely stuff in it. It's the range of it that gets me off.
Garcia died in 1995 before bringing the film to the screen. After waiting a "respectable period of time", Robert B. Weide, who had written and produced the 1996 film adaptation of Mother Night and had been working on a Vonnegut documentary for years (it would after long last be released in 2021), asked the author about the status of the rights.[15] Vonnegut bought back the rights from Garcia's estate and gave them to Weide on a "verbal handshake", where they remained for years while he attempted to write and find backers for his adaptation. By 2006, Weide reluctantly announced that he had lost the rights.[15] In April 2007, it was announced that screenwriter James V. Hart wrote an adaptation, which Vonnegut approved before he died.[16]
On July 19, 2017, it was announced that the novel would be adapted as a TV series and would be directed by Dan Harmon, who will be collaborating with Evan Katz on the project.[17][18]


## In popular culture
In a 1979 interview released in 2007, Douglas Adams discussed Vonnegut as an influence on The Hitchhikers Guide to the Galaxy:[19]
Sirens of Titan is just one of those books – you read it through the first time and you think it's very loosely, casually written. You think the fact that everything suddenly makes such good sense at the end is almost accidental. And then you read it a few more times, simultaneously finding out more about writing yourself, and you realize what an absolute tour de force it was, making something as beautifully honed as that appear so casual.


## References
^ Westbrook, Perry D. "Kurt Vonnegut Jr.: Overview." Contemporary Novelists. Susan Windisch Brown. 6th ed. New York: St. James Press, 1996.Literature Resource Center
^ Westbrook, Perry D. "Kurt Vonnegut Jr.: Overview." Contemporary Novelists. Susan Windisch Brown. 6th ed. New York: St. James Press, 1996.
^ Short, John G. (December 17, 1968). "The Cuckoo Clock in Kurt Vonnegut's Hell". The Harvard Crimson. Archived from the original on June 30, 2012. Retrieved May 22, 2012.
^ Gale, Floyd C. (December 1961). "Galaxy's 5 Star Shelf". Galaxy Science Fiction. pp. 144–147.
^ 1960 Hugo Awards, at TheHugoAwards.org; retrieved May 5, 2018
^ Deresiewicz, William (May 16, 2012). "'I Was There': On Kurt Vonnegut". The Nation. Retrieved May 22, 2012.
^ Random House Inc. v RosettaBooks LLC, from Legal Information Institute. Retrieved 2012-05-22
^ Legal Information Random House v. RosettaBooks ten years later from rosettabooks.com. Retrieved 2012-05-22
^ "The Organic Theater to present "The Sirens of Titan"". Press release. University of California, San Diego. October 10, 1977. Archived from the original on June 13, 2011. Retrieved May 22, 2012. Sirens is an account of the galactic peregrinations of billionaire Earthling Malachi Constant. His epic journeys to Mercury, Mars, Titan and back to Earth again are echoed in a psychic transition. Constant becomes a radio-controlled recruit in the doomed Martian army, learns to be a loving husband and father and eventually travels to that final home, Paradise.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown (link)
^ "Stuart Gordon and Ben Rock Reviving 40-Year-Old Play The Sirens of Titan". Dread Central. March 16, 2017. Retrieved March 20, 2017.
^ "MAINSTAGE 2017 – The Sirens of Titan". Sacred Fools. Retrieved March 20, 2017.
^ Davis, Tom (2009). "Hepburn Heights, The Den of Equity". Thirty-nine Years of Short-term Memory Loss. Grove Press. p. 249. ISBN 978-0-8021-1880-6. Kurt Vonnegut's novel, The Sirens of Titan, was both Jerry Garcia's and my favorite book and he had recently purchased the film rights....It was early December of 1983.
^ Davis, Tom (2009). "Hepburn Heights, The Den of Equity". Thirty-nine Years of Short-term Memory Loss. Grove Press. p. 256. ISBN 978-0-8021-1880-6.
^ Eisenhart, Mary (November 12, 1987). Transcript: Jerry Garcia Interview. Verified 30 March 2005. Jerry Garcia discusses Sirens of Titan at length.
^ a b Weide, Robert B. (January, 2001). Sirens of Titan. Verified 30 March 2005.
^ Adler, Shawn (April 13, 2007). Kurt Vonnegut's 'Sirens Of Titan' Being Adapted For Big Screen. Verified 15 April 2007.
^ Chavez, Danette (July 19, 2017). "Dan Harmon is bringing Kurt Vonnegut’s The Sirens Of Titan to TV". AVClub.com. Retrieved 2017-08-05.
^ "Dan Harmon to adapt classic Kurt Vonnegut novel The Sirens of Titan". Consequence of Sound. July 23, 2017. Retrieved July 23, 2017.
^ Shircore, Ian (1979). Transcript: Douglas Adams Interview. Douglas Adams discusses his early work


## External links
The Sirens of Titan at the Internet Speculative Fiction Database
Letter to Kurt: A review of Sirens of Titan. (Gosselin - Samizdat 2017)
v
t
e
Player Piano (1952)
The Sirens of Titan (1959)
Mother Night (1961)
Cat's Cradle (1963)
God Bless You, Mr. Rosewater (1965)
Slaughterhouse-Five (1969)
Breakfast of Champions (1973)
Slapstick (1976)
Jailbird (1979)
Deadeye Dick (1982)
Galápagos (1985)
Bluebeard (1987)
Hocus Pocus (1990)
Timequake (1997)
God Bless You, Dr. Kevorkian (1999)
We Are What We Pretend to Be: The First and Last Works (2013)
Canary in a Cat House (1961)
Welcome to the Monkey House (1968)
Bagombo Snuff Box (1999)
Armageddon in Retrospect (2008)
Look at the Birdie (2009)
While Mortals Sleep (2011)
Sucker's Portfolio (2013)
Complete Stories (2017)
Wampeters, Foma and Granfalloons (1974)
Palm Sunday (1981)
Fates Worse Than Death (1991)
A Man Without a Country (2005)
Armageddon in Retrospect (2008)
Kurt Vonnegut: Letters (2012)
If This Isn't Nice, What Is?: Advice to the Young (2013)
Vonnegut by the Dozen (2013)
Fortitude (1968)
Happy Birthday, Wanda June (1970)
Between Time and Timbuktu (1972)
Like Shaking Hands with God (1999)
Happy Birthday, Wanda June (1971)
Slaughterhouse-Five (1972)
Between Time and Timbuktu (1972)
Next Door (1975)
Kurt Vonnegut's God Bless You, Mr. Rosewater (1979)
Slapstick of Another Kind (1982)
Who Am I This Time? (1982)
Displaced Person (1985)
Kurt Vonnegut's Monkey House (1991)
Harrison Bergeron (1995)
Mother Night (1996)
Breakfast of Champions (1999)
2081 (2009)
2BR02B: To Be or Naught to Be (2016)
Kilgore Trout
Eliot Rosewater
Rabo Karabekian
RAMJAC
Ilium
Granfalloon
Tralfamadore
Ice-nine
Kurt Vonnegut Museum and Library
Vonnegut (Mercury crater)
Jill Krementz (second wife)
Mark Vonnegut (son)
Edith Vonnegut (daughter)
Kurt Vonnegut Sr. (father)
Bernard Vonnegut (brother)
Bernard Vonnegut Sr. (grandfather)
Clemens Vonnegut (great-grandfather)
MusicBrainz work
MusicBrainz release group


URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rogue_Moon
Content:

Rogue Moon is a short science fiction novel by Lithuanian-American writer Algis Budrys, published in 1960. It was a 1961 Hugo Award nominee. A substantially shortened version of the novel was originally published in F&SF; this novella-length story was included in The Science Fiction Hall of Fame, Volume Two, edited by Ben Bova. It was adapted into a radio drama by Yuri Rasovsky in 1979.
Rogue Moon is largely about the discovery and investigation of a large alien artifact found on the surface of the Moon. The object eventually kills its explorers in various ways—more specifically, investigators "die in their effort to penetrate an alien-built labyrinth where one wrong turn means instant death",[1] but their deaths slowly reveal the funhouse-like course humans must take in moving through it.[2]


## Synopsis
Dr. Edward Hawks runs a top-secret project for the United States Navy investigating a large alien artifact found on the Moon. Hawks has created a matter transmitter which scans a person or object to make a copy at receivers on the Moon. The earthbound person is placed in a state of sensory deprivation which allows him to share the experiences of his doppelgänger. The copies enter and explore the alien labyrinth, but are killed for violating the unknown rules in force within the structure. Each explorer gets a little further and learns a bit more about what they can and cannot do. However, none of the participants have been able to remain sane after experiencing death second-hand.
Vincent "Connie" Connington, Continental's head of personnel, tells Hawks that he has found the perfect candidate for the next mission. He takes Hawks to see Al Barker, an adventurer and thrill-seeker. Hawks also meets Barker's girlfriend, Claire Pack, a sociopath of a different kind. Where Connington covets power, and Barker seems to love death, Claire enjoys using sex, or the prospect of sex, to manipulate men. Connington wants her, but she stays with Barker because he has no weaknesses in her eyes. Hawks has to appeal to Barker's dark side to persuade him to join the project. Claire tries to get under Hawks' skin while simultaneously playing Connington off against Barker.
Barker is the first to retain his sanity after dying in the artifact, but even he is deeply affected, exclaiming, "...it didn't care! I was nothing to it!" He returns again and again, advancing a little farther each time. His relationship with Claire deteriorates, even as Connington continues his disastrous attempts to win her, at one point receiving a severe beating from Barker. Eventually, Connington announces he is quitting, and Claire leaves with him.
Meanwhile, Hawks starts a relationship with a young artist, Elizabeth Cummings, and expresses his torment over the project to her.
Finally, Barker announces that he is almost finished. Hawks takes Elizabeth to a romantic location and declares his love for her, then transmits himself to the Moon, where his duplicate joins Barker's on the final run. Together, the two weave their way through a series of bizarre landscapes containing death traps, before emerging out the other side.
Hawks tells Barker that they cannot return to Earth. The equipment on the Moon is too crude to transmit a man back safely, and even if it were possible, there are already people living their lives. All the men working on the Moon are duplicates, mostly Navy men, all volunteers. Hawks elects to remain outside until his air runs out. Barker returns to try to be transmitted back anyway. Back on Earth, Hawks removes his isolation suit and finds a note in his hand, which he knew would be there. It reads simply, "Remember me to her."


## Characters
Dr. Edward Hawks
Vincent Connington
Al Barker
Claire Pack
Elizabeth Cummings


## Themes
Science fiction scholar Jeff King wrote that the novel's major themes are "the meaning of life and humanity's yearning to transcend death. Algis Budrys uses the trip through the alien labyrinth as a metaphor for life." Therefore, "Barker's discovery when he makes it completely through the alien structure" is that "a person must create himself or herself." King adds that a secondary theme is: "Human beings are possessed of more than the ability to reason and to function in the physical universe. They also feel, and development of that quality is as important as development of any other."[3]
A reviewer for SFF World disagreed with Jeff King, considering the novel to be about death or dying; he referred to Arthur C. Clarke when he opined, "Rogue Moon seems to be initially a great exploration puzzle, about a large alien artefact found on the surface of the Moon. All attempts to explore it leads to the intrepid explorers being killed or going insane in various ways, but their deaths slowly reveal that the process of dying is the point: that and by dying in various ways by moving through it humans learn something about themselves, as presumably would the aliens, should they still exist. It is a Clarkean test, an ordeal that humans must pass in order to evolve and develop beyond their present state. As this shows, Rogue Moon is a deeper and more complex novel than we expect at first."[4]


## Reception
The novel was chosen in 2012 for the SF Masterworks series by publisher Victor Gollancz Ltd.
David Pringle included the novel in his book Science Fiction: The 100 Best Novels (Xanadu, 1985, ISBN 978-0-947761-10-3).[5] Nick Rennison and Stephen E. Andrews, similarly, included it in their 100 Must-Read Science Fiction Novels.[6][7]
In contemporary reviews, Alfred Bester called Rogue Moon "one of the finest flashes of heat lightning to dazzle us this year," saying it "has come very close to realizing our ideal of science fiction, the story of how human beings may be affected by the science of the future." Bester, however, faulted the ending as unresolved, declaring that Budrys "brought his book to a semi-cadence at exactly the point where it cried for completion."[8] In counterpoint, James Blish declared the novel "a masterpiece... not only a bequest but a monument." He found that Budrys had "cunningly constructed his ambiguity" in the novel's conclusion, and proved "that a science fiction novel can be a fully realized work of art."[9]
Scholar/critic John Clute said that, in comparison with Budrys's earlier novels, such as False Night (1954) and Who? (1958), Rogue Moon is "much more thoroughly successful" and "now something of an sf classic":
A good deal has been written about the highly integrated symbolic structure of this story, whose perfectly competent surface narration deals with a Hard-SF solution to the problem of an alien labyrinth, discovered on the Moon, which kills anyone who tries to pass through it. At one level, the novel's description of attempts to thread the labyrinth from Earth via Matter Transmission makes for excellent traditional sf; at another, it is a sustained rite de passage, a doppelgänger conundrum about the mind-body split, a death-paean. There is no doubt that AB [Algis Budrys] intends that both levels of reading register, however any interepretation might run; in this novel the two levels interact fruitfully.[10]
Graham Sleight, another science fiction scholar, writes that Rogue Moon takes the themes of Who? — "identity, ethics, memory, scientific obsession — and intensifies its gaze on them. But it also has a new concern, death. Like its predecessor, it uses an almost arbitrary science-fictional device to examine an existential question, in a way that a mimetic novel never could." Then Hawks hires Barker: "It appears, though it's scarcely the point of Rogue Moon, that there's a complex permitted route through the artefact, and that any deviation from it will be fatal. Therefore, ultimate success for Barker will be to emerge on the other side of the artefact."[11]
Jeff King wrote, "Rogue Moon was written relatively early in Budrys's career, yet his style is fully evident. He employs an almost minimalist approach that calls for careful word selection to paint vivid pictures while studiously avoiding flowery, overlong sentences. Like others of his well-known works, this is a short novel, seemingly Budrys's preferred length."[3]
Carl Sagan in 1978 listed Rogue Moon as among the "rare few science‐fiction novels [that] combine a standard science‐fiction theme with a deep human sensitivity".[12]
At the SF Site, reviewer John DeNardo gave the book 3 out of 5 stars, saying, "The artifact was an intriguing puzzle; the story kept interest levels up. ... The premise is an intriguing one." DeNardo adds that "the ability to duplicate people on the Moon" provides "a nice healthy dose of wow factor." But he grew bored with the characters ("too much of the book centers on the characters of Hawks, Barker, Claire (Barker's lover), and Vincent Connington (the personnel director). While their stories are somewhat interesting, I really wanted to see more of the BDO," and he recommends to readers "the novella on which it was based."[2]


## Footnotes
^ Charlesdee (July 31, 2011). "Not a Stunt: Algis Burdrys". www.worldswithoutend.com. Retrieved February 18, 2013.
^ a b DeNardo, John (May 2, 2005). "REVIEW: Rogue Moon by Algis Budrys". SF Signal. Retrieved February 18, 2013. A mysterious, alien artifact is found on the Moon and discovered to be deadly to anyone who enters it. With the help of duplicating technology, people are sent in to investigate it, usually dying within seconds of the last explorer. In this way, the artifact is mapped out little by little.
^ a b King, Jeff (2002). "Rogue Moon". In Fiona Kelleghan (ed.). Classics of Science Fiction and Fantasy Literature. Vol. 2. Pasadena, Calif.: Salem Press. pp. 458–460. ISBN 1-58765-050-9.
^ Yon, Mark. "Rogue Moon by Algis Budrys". SFFWorld.com. Retrieved February 18, 2013.
^ Von Ruff, Al. "Publication Listing for Science Fiction: The 100 Best Novels". Internet Speculative Fiction Database. Retrieved February 18, 2013.
^ London: A & C Black, 2007, Series: Bloomsbury Good Reading Guides, ISBN 978-0-7136-7585-6
^ Von Ruff, Al. "Publication Listing for 100 Must-Read Science Fiction Novels". Internet Speculative Fiction Database. Retrieved February 18, 2013.
^ Bester, Alfred (June 1961). "Review: Rogue Moon". The Magazine of Fantasy & Science Fiction. 20 (6): 104.
^ Blish, James (June 1961). "Review: Rogue Moon". The Magazine of Fantasy & Science Fiction. 20 (6): 105.
^ Clute, John (1995). "Budrys, Algis". Collier, John. The Encyclopedia of Science Fiction (Updated ed.). New York: St Martin's Griffin. p. 170. ISBN 0-312-09618-6.
^ Sleight, Graham (June 2008). "Yesterday's Tomorrows: Algis Budrys". Locus. Retrieved February 18, 2013.
^ Sagan, Carl (May 28, 1978). "Growing up with Science Fiction". The New York Times. p. SM7. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved December 12, 2018.


## References
Tuck, Donald H. (1974). The Encyclopedia of Science Fiction and Fantasy. Chicago: Advent. p. 72. ISBN 0-911682-20-1.


## External links
Rogue Moon title listing at the Internet Speculative Fiction Database
Rogue Moon at Open Library


URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Venus_Plus_X
Content:

Venus Plus X is a science fiction novel by American writer Theodore Sturgeon, published in 1960.[1][2] David Pringle included it in his book Science Fiction: The 100 Best Novels.


## Plot
Charlie Johns wakes up in Ledom (model backwards), a world of gender-neutral people. He believes that he has been transported to the future, and the Ledom tell him that humanity has been destroyed by nuclear war.
He meets Seace, the head of the Science One, who explains the A-field, an invisible force field the Ledom use for everything from spoons to buildings. He meets Mielwis, the head of the Medical One, who explains to him how the Ledom came to be gender-neutral by a mutation. Mielwis tells him that the Ledom have both genital organs, which drop down when they are aroused and retract when they are not in use.
He meets Nasive and Grocid, the heads of the Children's Ones, who explain Ledom religion to him. The Ledom worship children because "it is inconceivable we would ever obey one".
Then Philos, a historian, leads him to the cerebrostyle, a technology that allows a viewer to watch recorded memories in their mind. Charlie reads a "letter" in this machine which is a manifesto of Ledom society. It tells how sexual differences have caused strife for humans and how Ledom society has achieved harmony by following a charitic religion and creating a gender-neutral culture.
After he has finished reading the letter, Philos takes Charlie out to the edges of Ledom, where he finds Philos's partner Froure and their child Soutin. Philos had let the Ledom think Froure and Soutin had died in a landslide because the Ledom, despite what Mielwis had told Charlie, did not mutate but undergo monthly medical procedures to keep them gender-neutral, and Philos does not want this to happen to Soutin. Philos asks Charlie if he will take Soutin back to his time period, and Charlie agrees.
They go back to the Science One and after a short confrontation with Seace, Charlie takes Soutin into the time machine. However, the time machine does not go anywhere and Charlie realizes he is stuck in Ledom. Mielwis asks him for his opinion about Ledom. Charlie says they are all freaks and if humanity knew they existed, humans would kill every one of them.
Mielwis knocks Charlie unconscious and confers with Nasive about how humanity is not yet ready for gender equality.
Charlie is allowed to live with Philos, Froure, and Soutin at the edge of Ledom. The book ends with nuclear bombs bursting in the sky, with the Ledom and Charlie being protected by the A-field.


## Reception
Venus Plus X was a finalist for the 1961 Hugo Award for Best Novel.[3] Jo Walton has described it as "clever" and "thought-provoking", and noted that it is "weirdly ahead of its time and yet could not have been written in any other (time)."[4] Graham Sleight has observed that the novel has "problems (...) for the contemporary reader": firstly, that "the debate about men and women has moved on", and secondly, that the text "reads peculiarly as if directed at men".[5]


## References
^ The Battle of the Sexes in Science Fiction, Justine Larbalestier. Wesleyan University Press, 2002, ISBN 0-8195-6526-1. p. 96
^ Battle of the Sexes in Science Fiction, Google Books
^ 1961 Hugo Awards, at TheHugoAwards.org; retrieved December 1, 2020
^ Revisiting the Hugos: Hugo Nominees: 1961, by Jo Walton, at Tor.com; published December 12, 2010; retrieved December 1, 2020
^ "Graham Sleight's Yesterday's Tomorrows: Theodore Sturgeon". Locus Online. August 19, 2010. Retrieved July 17, 2024.


## External links
Venus Plus X title listing at the Internet Speculative Fiction Database
v
t
e
The Dreaming Jewels
More Than Human
The Cosmic Rape
Venus Plus X
Some of Your Blood
Godbody
The King and Four Queens
Voyage to the Bottom of the Sea
The Rare Breed
I, Libertine
Without Sorcery
E Pluribus Unicorn
Baby Is Three (novella)
"Helix the Cat"
"If All Men Were Brothers, Would You Let One Marry Your Sister?"
"It!"
"Killdozer!"
"The Man Who Lost the Sea"
"Microcosmic God"
"The Pod in the Barrier"
"A Saucer of Loneliness"
"Shottle Bop"
"Slow Sculpture"
"The World Well Lost"
"Shore Leave"
"Amok Time"
Theodore Sturgeon Award
Sturgeon's law


URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hothouse_(novel)
Content:

Hothouse is a 1962 science fiction novel by British writer Brian Aldiss, composed of five novelettes that were originally serialised in The Magazine of Fantasy & Science Fiction in 1961. In the US, an abridged version was published as The Long Afternoon of Earth; the full version was not published in the United States until 1976.
In 2009, IDW Publishing repackaged the novel with a new introduction by Clifford Meth.


## Title
In the novel, Earth now has one side constantly facing the sun (which is larger and hotter than it is at present) so it has become a veritable hothouse, where plants have filled almost all ecological niches. According to Aldiss' account, the US publisher insisted on the name change so the book would not be placed in the horticulture section in bookshops.


## Plot introduction
Set in a far future, the Earth has locked rotation with the Sun, and is attached to the now-more-distant Moon, which resides at a Trojan point, with cobwebs spun by enormous spider-like plants. The Sun is described as "paralysing half the heaven" and "always fixed and still at one point in the sky" and, with the increased light and heat, the plants are engaged in a constant frenzy of growth and decay, like a tropical forest enhanced a thousandfold. The plants – many now omnivores – have filled all the ecological niches on the land and in the air, many evolving primitive nervous systems and, in some cases, eyes; of the animals in the forest only the descendants of four species of social insects remain – tigerflies (evolved from wasps), tree-bees, plant-ants and termights (from termites) – along with small groups of humans (a fifth of the size they are now); all other land and air animals have been driven to extinction by the vegetable kingdom, apart from a few shore dwellers. The humans live on the edge of extinction, within the canopy layer of a giant banyan tree that covers the continent on the day side of the Earth.


## Plot summary
Lily-yo, leader of a small, matriarchal human tribe, decides that the group should break up, as the adults are too old, and should go to the "Tips", the dangerous top levels of the forest, to go "Up". "Burnurns" – transparent seed-casings – are collected, and the adults seal themselves inside after which the young attach them to the webs of the giant spider-like plants called "Traversers", which travel into space to receive more intense sunlight and escape the parasitic tigerflies; as planned a traverser brushes against the sticky pods and carries them to the moon (which now has a breatheable atmosphere).
The unconscious adults reach their destination, where they discover they have transformed into "Flymen", mutated by space radiation into flight-capable forms. They meet others and are impressed into an expedition back to Earth to kidnap human children to increase the Flymen population. They hide inside a Traverser to make the return journey to Earth.
Back in the jungle, Toy is now the new leader. While attempting to kill a large seed-shaped "suckerbird", the tribe accidentally become passengers on the suckerbird. After a long flight, they crash on the coast at the base of a "termight" castle on a peninsula. Walking back to the forest through "Nomansland" – the lethal interface-area between land and sea – Gren is waylaid by a "morel", a sentient fungus which attaches itself to his head and forms a symbiotic relationship. After a power-struggle, Gren leaves the tribe with his girlfriend Poyly, also taken over by the morel.
On their travels, they meet Yattmur of the Herder tribe, who live in caves in a congealed lava bed. At the "Skirt of the black mouth", an unknown creature with Siren-like capabilities almost leads them to their deaths. Escaping, they meet the Tummy-belly men, some of whom they free by cutting the umbilical cords by which they are attached to a parasitic tree. All board a boat belonging to the tummy-bellies, but during the escape Poyly is killed. The boat, uncontrolled, floats downriver into the sea. After several adventures, the crew find themselves on an iceberg, the boat destroyed, after which the berg abuts a small islet. They leave by hitching a ride on a plant which propagates by using self-propelled, stilt-walking seeds, which instinctively walk to the mainland.
They find themselves at the terminator, the boundary between the day and night sides. To their horror, they realise they are being carried over it. After a long journey, the seed stops near the top of a mountain, which is tall enough to still be lit by the low sun. There, Yattmur gives birth to Gren's child; Gren, increasingly taken over by the morel, wants the baby to host it as well. They meet the Sharp-furs, tribal baboons who use speech, and then they are approached by the Sodal Ye, a highly evolved fish, and his three-human servants. In return for food, the Sodal Ye thinks of a way to remove the morel from Gren's head by coaxing it into a bowl.
They decide to accompany the Sodal Ye back to Bountiful Basin, an arm of the sea close to the terminator. On the way they witness a solar flare. The morel explains to them that the world is about to end as the Sun brightens, and the strange, green columns they begin to see beaming into space are shafts of organic material, transferring to new star systems.
Followed by sharp-furs and others, they notice a traverser has landed and blocked the passage to their destination. This is the traverser that was carrying Lily-yo and companions. The morel manages to take over the Sodal Ye and when they reach the giant spider, Gren meets Lily-yo again. They board a traverser which is going to lift off to the stars (after being taken over by the morel which has now divided) – all except Gren, Yattmur, and the baby, who decide to return to the familiar forest – for the end of the world, while soon, will not occur within any of their lifetimes.


## Characters and species


### Characters
Gren – Young male tribesman. Later, hosts a morel.
Lily-yo – Leader of Gren's tribe.
Band Appa Bondi – Flyman; stolen from Earth as a child.
Poyly – Gren's tribal girlfriend.
The morel – Sapient fungus; forms symbiotic relationships with other lifeforms and enhances their intelligence.
Yattmur – Gren's girlfriend from the Herder tribe.
Laren – Gren and Yattmur's son.
The tummy-belly men (fishers) – Humans who have become symbionts with the Tummy Trees. They lack courage and panic loudly at anything they find disturbing.
Sodal Ye – Prophet of the Nightside mountains.


### Species
Flymen – Human sub-species; able to glide and fly. Principally moon-dwellers.
Sharp-furs – Denizens of the Nightside, descended from baboons.
Sodals – Descended from dolphins, and now the most intelligent of all life on Earth. The only species that realises the Earth is doomed.
Traversers – Giant spider-like vegetables, they spin webs that stretch between the Earth and Moon, and a few have travelled to nearby stars. Their ten-thousand year infancy is now spent on the Moon, away from the worst of the parasitic tigerflies (their only enemies). When mature they live on the solar radiation in space, returning to the Earth to feed and mate, and the Moon to bud.


## Reception
The five Hothouse stories were collectively awarded the 1962 Hugo Award for Best Short Fiction.[1]
James Blish called the stories "utter nonsense", and chastised Aldiss for ignoring basic rules of physics.[2] The magazine editor actually sought scientific advice about one aspect of the book. He was told that the orbital dynamics involved meant that it was nonsense, but the image of the Earth and Moon side by side in orbit, shrouded with cobwebs woven by giant vegetable spiders, was so outrageous and appealing that he published it anyway.
Galaxy reviewer Floyd C. Gale praised the novel as "a tour-de-force guaranteed to startle the most blasé SF buff."[3]


## Magazine stories
There were originally five novelettes, which appeared in five issues of the magazine in 1961.[4][5]


## Versions and adaptations
Gamma World, a science fantasy role-playing game, first published by TSR in 1978, was partly inspired by the novel, as noted in the foreword to the game's first edition rulebook.
The story was later loosely adapted into a four-part comic entitled Hom, by Carlos Giménez in Continuity Comics' Echo of Futurepast anthology.


## General and cited sources
Hothouse on his official site
SF Site review
Lost Book Archives review


## Citations
^ 1962 Hugo Awards at HugoAwards.org; retrieved 6 January 2017
^ "What to Read" Archived 20 April 2005 at the Wayback Machine
^ "Galaxy's 5 Star Shelf", Galaxy Science Fiction, October 1962, p.193
^ Fantasy and Sci-fi list (page 10) Archived 19 November 2006 at the Wayback Machine
^ Fantasy and Sci-fi list (page 11) Archived 9 December 2006 at the Wayback Machine


## External links
Hothouse title listing at the Internet Speculative Fiction Database
"Hothouse" title listing at the Internet Speculative Fiction Database
"Nomansland" title listing at the Internet Speculative Fiction Database
"Undergrowth" title listing at the Internet Speculative Fiction Database
"Timberline" title listing at the Internet Speculative Fiction Database
"Evergreen" title listing at the Internet Speculative Fiction Database
v
t
e
"The Longest Voyage" by Poul Anderson (1961)
"Hothouse" by Brian W. Aldiss (1962)
"The Dragon Masters" by Jack Vance (1963)
"No Truce with Kings" by Poul Anderson (1964)
"Soldier, Ask Not" by Gordon R. Dickson (1965)
""Repent, Harlequin!" Said the Ticktockman" by Harlan Ellison (1966)
"Neutron Star" by Larry Niven (1967)
"I Have No Mouth, and I Must Scream" by Harlan Ellison (1968)
"The Beast that Shouted Love at the Heart of the World" by Harlan Ellison (1969)
"Time Considered as a Helix of Semi-Precious Stones" by Samuel R. Delany (1970)
"Slow Sculpture" by Theodore Sturgeon (1971)
"Inconstant Moon" by Larry Niven (1972)
"Eurema's Dam" by R. A. Lafferty / "The Meeting" by Frederik Pohl and C. M. Kornbluth (1973)
"The Ones Who Walk Away from Omelas" by Ursula K. Le Guin (1974)
"The Hole Man" by Larry Niven (1975)
"Catch That Zeppelin!" by Fritz Leiber (1976)
"Tricentennial" by Joe Haldeman (1977)
"Jeffty Is Five" by Harlan Ellison (1978)
"Cassandra" by C. J. Cherryh (1979)
"The Way of Cross and Dragon" by George R. R. Martin (1980)
Complete list
Retro
1955–1960
1961–1980
1981–2000
2001–2020
2021–present


URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Drowned_World
Content:

The Drowned World (1962), by J. G. Ballard, is a British science fiction novel that depicts a post-apocalyptic future in which global warming, caused by increased solar radiation, has rendered uninhabitable much of the surface of planet Earth. The story follows a team of scientists researching environmental developments in the flooded city of London. The novel is an expansion of the novella "The Drowned World", which was first published in Science Fiction Adventures magazine, in the January 1962 issue, Vol. 4, No. 24.
In 2010, Time magazine named The Drowned World one of the ten best novels about a post-apocalyptic world on Earth.[2] In science fiction literature, The Drowned World is considered one of the founding novels of the climate fiction sub-genre.[3]


## Synopsis
In the mid-22nd century, violent and prolonged solar storms enlarge the Van Allen radiation belt, which deteriorated the ionosphere of the Earth. The solar radiation bombarding the planet increased surface temperatures, raised the levels of the seas, and so established a tropical climate throughout most of the planet; with most of Earth no longer habitable by humans, the survivors migrate to the North Pole and to the South Pole, which the planetary tropical climate has rendered fit for human habitation.
In 2145, under the command of Colonel Riggs, Dr Robert Kerans is part of a scientific expedition sent to catalogue the flora and fauna of the lagoon that covers the city of London.[4] In the course of their scientific work, the members of the expedition begin to experience strange dreams. Amidst talk of the army and the scientists moving north, Lieutenant Hardman, the other officer in the expedition, flees the London lagoon and heads south; a search team sent to fetch him failed.
As the other inhabitants of the lagoon finally flee the overheating sunlight and head north, Kerans and two other scientists, the reclusive Dr Beatrice Dahl and Dr Alan Bodkin, decide to remain. A group of pirates led by a man named Strangman arrives to loot treasures from the deep waters of the London lagoon. After draining the lagoon, Strangman and his pirates expose the city of London, which disgusts Kerans and Bodkin; the latter attempts and fails to explode the flood defences and re-flood the London area. Afterwards, with Kerans and Dahl resigned to their fate, Strangman vengefully pursues and kills Bodkin.
Meanwhile, Strangman and his pirates become suspicious of Kerans, and they imprison him and Dahl. The pirates torture Kerans, which he survives; although weakened by the torture, Kerans attempts and fails to free Dahl from captivity. Kerans and Dahl are confronted by Strangman and his pirates, but Colonel Riggs and the army return to rescue them. Rather than punish Strangman, the military authorities co-operate with him, which angers and frustrates Dr Kerans, who then successfully re-floods the lagoon.
Weakened by a wound, Kerans flees the lagoon and heads southwards aimlessly, and encounters a frail Lieutenant Hardman, who has become blind. After aiding Hardman, Dr. Kerans continues travelling south, like "a second Adam searching for the forgotten paradises of the reborn sun".


## Themes
In The Drowned World (1962) J.G. Ballard presents characters who take advantage of societal and civilisational collapse as opportunities to pursue new modes of perception, unconscious urges, and systems of meaning.[5] In the Humanities Review, the writer Travis Eldborough said that literary works of Ballard in general, and The Drowned World in particular, allow the readers to "ask whether our sense of Self – and of the self as independent, sovereign, irrevocable – is, itself, a [social] construction, and a temporary one."[6]
The critic Brian Baker said that in the thematic subjects of The Drowned World, Ballard "explores the deep implications of time, space, psychology and evolutionary biology in order to dismantle anthropocentric narratives and, in turn, open up alternative ways of experiencing, and conceiving of, contemporary human subjectivity."[7] The scholar Jim Clarke said that in The Drowned World and in The Crystal World (1966), "Ballard's solitary protagonists traverse liminal states, often as psychological as physical, in which civilization recedes to the status of memory, and existence comes to be dominated and defined by the environment."[8]


## Critical reception
In 1962, upon publication of The Drowned World, the novelist Kingsley Amis said that J.G. Ballard is "one of the brightest new stars in post-war fiction", and said that the story contains "an oppressive power, reminiscent of Conrad." In 1966, the science fiction writer Algis Budrys mocked The Drowned World as "a run, hide, slither, grope and die book".[9]
In 2018, in a retrospective assessment of the work of J.G. Ballard, the writer Will Self said that Ballard's literature went unappreciated during his life, and that, following a critical reappraisal of his work, The Drowned World shows Ballard to be the most important British writer of the late 20th century.[10] Moreover, the novelist Martin Amis said that "it is the measure of [his] creative radicalism that [Ballard] welcomes these desperate dystopias with every atom of his being", but criticized the perfunctory plot of The Drowned World, from which "we conclude that Ballard is quite unstimulated by human interaction – unless it takes the form of something inherently weird, like mob atavism or mass hysteria. What excites him is human isolation."[11]


## See also
List of underwater science fiction works
Biblical deluge


## References
^ "JG Ballard's The Drowned World Reviewed". jgballard.ca.
^ Romero, Frances (7 June 2010). "Top 10 Post-Apocalyptic Books". Time Magazine. Retrieved 2 April 2018.
^ Clarke, Jim (2013). "Reading Climate Change in J.G. Ballard". Critical Survey. 25 (2): 7–21. doi:10.3167/cs.2013.250202.
^ "The Drowned World | W. W. Norton & Company". books.wwnorton.com. Retrieved 6 February 2016.
^ "Will Self on JG Ballard's 'The Drowned World'". The Daily Telegraph. 31 August 2013. Retrieved 6 February 2016.
^ Elborough, Travis. "Reality is a Stage Set: Travis Elborough talks to J. G. Ballard".'" (PDF). Humanities Review. Retrieved 2 April 2018.
^ Baker, Brian (March 2008). The Geometry of the Space Age: J. G. Ballard's Short Fiction and Science Fiction of the 1960s. Continuum. pp. 11–22. ISBN 9780826497260. Retrieved 2 April 2018. {{cite book}}: |website= ignored (help)
^ Clarke, Jim (2013). "Reading Climate Change in J.G. Ballard". Critical Survey. 25 (2): 7–21. doi:10.3167/cs.2013.250202. JSTOR 42751031.
^ Budrys, Algis (December 1966). "Galaxy Bookshelf". Galaxy Science Fiction. pp. 125–133.
^ Self, Will (31 August 2013). "Will Self on J.G. Ballard's 'The Drowned World'". The Daily Telegraph. Retrieved 2 April 2018.
^ Amis, Martin. "Rereading The Drowned World". Retrieved 2 April 2018.


## Sources
McCarthy, Patrick A., (1997). "Allusions in Ballard's The Drowned World", Science-Fiction Studies #72, 24:2, July, 302–10.
Rossi, Umberto, (1994). "Images from the Disaster Area: An Apocalyptic Reading of Urban Landscapes in Ballard's The Drowned World and Hello America", Science-Fiction Studies #62, 21:1, March, 81–97.


## External links
The Drowned World title listing at the Internet Speculative Fiction Database
The Drowned World at Open Library
v
t
e
The Wind from Nowhere (1961)
The Drowned World (1962)
The Burning World (1964)
The Crystal World (1966)
The Atrocity Exhibition (1969)
Crash (1973)
Concrete Island (1974)
High-Rise (1975)
The Unlimited Dream Company (1979)
Hello America (1981)
Empire of the Sun (1984)
The Day of Creation (1987)
Running Wild (1988)
The Kindness of Women (1991)
Rushing to Paradise (1994)
Cocaine Nights (1996)
Super-Cannes (2000)
Millennium People (2003)
Kingdom Come (2006)
"Mobile" (1957)
"The Concentration City" (1957)
"Track 12" (1958)
"Zone of Terror" (1960)
"The Sound-Sweep" (1960)
"The Voices of Time" (1960)
"Chronopolis" (1960)
"Studio 5, The Stars" (1961)
"Deep End" (1961)
"Mr F. is Mr F." (1961)
"Billennium" (1962)
"Minus One" (1963)
"The Recognition" (1967)
" The Day of Forever" (1967)
"Why I Want to Fuck Ronald Reagan" (1968)
"Venus Smiles" (1971)
The Voices of Time and Other Stories (1962)
Billennium (1962)
Passport to Eternity (1963)
The 4-Dimensional Nightmare (1963)
The Terminal Beach (1964)
The Impossible Man (1966)
The Overloaded Man (1967)
The Disaster Area (1967)
The Day of Forever (1967)
Vermilion Sands (1971)
Chronopolis and Other Stories (1971)
Low-Flying Aircraft and Other Stories (1976)
The Best of J. G. Ballard (1977)
The Best Short Stories of J. G. Ballard (1978)
The Venus Hunters (1980)
Myths of the Near Future (1982)
The Voices of Time (1985)
Memories of the Space Age (1988)
War Fever (1990)
The Complete Short Stories of J. G. Ballard: Volume 1 (2006)
The Complete Short Stories of J. G. Ballard: Volume 2 (2006)
A User's Guide to the Millennium (1996)
Extreme Metaphors (2012)
Miracles of Life (2008)
When Dinosaurs Ruled the Earth (1970)
Crash! (1971)
Empire of the Sun (1987)
Crash (1996)
The Atrocity Exhibition (1998)
Low-Flying Aircraft (2002)
High-Rise (2015)
VIAF


URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/A_Clockwork_Orange_(novel)
Content:

A Clockwork Orange is a dystopian satirical black comedy novel by English writer Anthony Burgess, published on March 17, 1962. It is set in a near-future society that has a youth subculture of extreme violence. The teenage protagonist, Alex, narrates his violent exploits and his experiences with state authorities intent on reforming him.[1] The book is partially written in a Russian-influenced argot called "Nadsat", which takes its name from the Russian suffix that is equivalent to '-teen' in English.[2][unreliable source] According to Burgess, the novel was a jeu d'esprit written in just three weeks.[3]
In 2005, A Clockwork Orange was included on Time magazine's list of the 100 best English-language novels written since 1923,[4] and it was named by Modern Library and its readers as one of the 100 best English-language novels of the 20th century.[5] The original manuscript of the book has been kept at McMaster University's William Ready Division of Archives and Research Collections in Hamilton, Ontario, Canada since the institution purchased the documents in 1971.[6] It is considered one of the most influential dystopian books.
In 2022, the novel was included on the "Big Jubilee Read" list of 70 books by Commonwealth authors selected to celebrate the Platinum Jubilee of Elizabeth II.[7]


## Plot summary


### Part 1: Alex's world
Alex is a 15-year-old gang leader living in a near-future dystopian city. His friends ("droogs" in the novel's Anglo-Russian slang, "Nadsat") and fellow gang members are Dim, a slow-witted bruiser, who is the gang's muscle; Georgie, an ambitious second-in-command; and Pete, who mostly plays along as the droogs indulge their taste for "ultra-violence" (random, violent mayhem). Characterised as a sociopath and hardened juvenile delinquent, Alex is also intelligent, quick-witted, and enjoys classical music; he is particularly fond of Beethoven, whom he calls "Lovely Ludwig Van".
The droogs sit in their favourite hangout, the Korova Milk Bar, drinking "milk-plus" (milk laced with the customer's drug of choice) to prepare for a night of ultra-violence. They assault a scholar walking home from the public library; rob a shop, leaving the owner and his wife bloodied and unconscious; beat up a beggar; then scuffle with a rival gang. Joyriding through the countryside in a stolen car, they break into an isolated cottage and terrorise the young couple living there, beating the husband and gang-raping his wife. The husband is a writer working on a manuscript entitled A Clockwork Orange, and Alex contemptuously reads out a paragraph that states the novel's main theme before shredding the manuscript. At the Korova, Alex strikes Dim for his crude response to a woman's singing of an operatic passage, and strains within the gang become apparent. At home in his parents' flat, Alex plays classical music at top volume, which he describes as giving him orgasmic bliss before falling asleep.
Alex feigns illness to his parents to stay out of school the next day. Following an unexpected visit from P. R. Deltoid, his "post-corrective adviser", Alex visits a record store, where he meets two pre-teen girls. He invites them back to the flat, where he drugs and rapes them. That night after a nap, Alex finds his droogs in a mutinous mood, waiting downstairs in the torn-up and graffitied lobby. Georgie challenges Alex for leadership of the gang, demanding that they focus on higher-value targets in their robberies. Alex quells the rebellion by slashing Dim's hand and fighting with Georgie, then soothes the gang by agreeing to Georgie's plan to rob the home of a wealthy elderly woman. Alex breaks in and knocks the woman unconscious, but when he hears sirens and opens the door to flee, Dim strikes him as revenge for the earlier fight. The gang abandons Alex on the front step to be arrested by the police; while in custody, he learns that the woman has died from her injuries.


### Part 2: The Ludovico Technique
Alex is convicted of murder and sentenced to 14 years in prison. His parents visit one day to inform him that Georgie has been killed in a botched robbery. Two years into his term, he has obtained a job in one of the prison chapels, playing music on the stereo to accompany the Sunday Christian services. After his fellow cellmates blame him for beating a troublesome cellmate to death, he is chosen to undergo an experimental behaviour modification treatment called the Ludovico Technique in exchange for having the remainder of his sentence commuted. The technique is a form of aversion therapy in which Alex is injected with nausea-inducing drugs while watching graphically violent films, eventually conditioning him to become severely ill at the mere thought of violence. As an unintended consequence, the soundtrack to one of the films, Beethoven's Fifth Symphony, renders Alex unable to enjoy his beloved classical music as before.
The technique's effectiveness is demonstrated to a group of VIPs, who watch as Alex collapses before a man who slaps him and abases himself before a scantily clad young woman. Although the prison chaplain accuses the state of stripping Alex of free will, the government officials on the scene are pleased with the results, and Alex is released from prison.


### Part 3: After prison
Alex returns to his parents' flat, only to find that they are letting his room to a lodger. Now homeless, he wanders the streets and enters a public library, hoping to learn of a painless method for committing suicide. The old scholar whom Alex had assaulted in Part 1 finds him and beats him with the help of several friends. Two policemen come to Alex's rescue, but they turn out to be Dim and Billyboy, a former rival gang leader. They take Alex outside town, brutalise him, and abandon him there. Alex collapses at the door of an isolated cottage, realising too late that it is the one he and his droogs invaded in Part 1.
The writer, F. Alexander, still lives here, but his wife has since died of what he believes to be injuries she sustained in the rape. He does not recognise Alex but gives him shelter and questions him about the conditioning he has undergone. Alexander and his colleagues, all highly critical of the government, plan to use Alex as a symbol of state brutality and thus prevent the incumbent government from being re-elected. After Alex inadvertently reveals that he was the ringleader of the home invasion, he is removed from the cottage and locked in an upper-storey bedroom as a relentless barrage of classical music plays over speakers. He attempts suicide by leaping from the window.
Alex wakes up in a hospital, where he is courted by government officials, anxious to counter the bad publicity created by his suicide attempt. He is informed that F. Alexander has been "put away" for Alex's protection and his own. Alex is offered a well-paying job if he agrees to side with the government once discharged. A round of tests reveals that his old violent impulses have returned, indicating that the hospital doctors have undone the effects of his conditioning. As photographers snap pictures, Alex daydreams of orgiastic violence and reflects, "I was cured all right."
In the final chapter, Alex—now 18 years old and working for the nation's musical recording archives—finds himself halfheartedly preparing for another night of crime with a new gang (Len, Rick, and Bully). After a chance encounter with Pete, who has reformed and married, Alex finds himself taking less and less pleasure in acts of senseless violence. He begins contemplating giving up crime himself to become a productive member of society and start a family of his own while reflecting on the notion that his children could end up being just as destructive as he has been, if not more so.


## Omission of the final chapter in the US
The book has three parts, each with seven chapters. Burgess has stated that the total of 21 chapters was an intentional nod to the age of 21 being recognised as a milestone in human maturation.[8] The 21st chapter was omitted from the editions published in the United States prior to 1986.[9] In the introduction to the updated American text (these newer editions include the missing 21st chapter), Burgess explains that when he first brought the book to an American publisher, he was told that US audiences would never go for the final chapter, in which Alex sees the error of his ways, decides he has lost his taste for violence and resolves to turn his life around.
At the American publisher's insistence, Burgess allowed its editors to cut the redeeming final chapter from the US version, so that the tale would end on a darker note, with Alex becoming his old, ultraviolent self again – an ending which the publisher insisted would be "more realistic" and appealing to a US audience. The film adaptation, directed by Stanley Kubrick, is based on the American edition of the book, and is considered to be "badly flawed" by Burgess.[citation needed] Kubrick called Chapter 21 "an extra chapter" and claimed that he had not read the original version until he had virtually finished the screenplay and that he had never given serious consideration to using it.[10] In Kubrick's opinion – as in the opinion of other readers, including the original American editor – the final chapter was unconvincing and inconsistent with the book.[8] Kubrick's stance was unusual when compared to the standard Hollywood practice of producing films with the familiar tropes of resolving moral messages and good triumphing over evil before the film's end.


## Characters
Alex: The novel's protagonist and leader among his droogs. He often refers to himself as "Your Humble Narrator". Having coaxed two ten-year-old girls into his bedroom, Alex refers to himself as "Alexander the Large" while raping them; this was later the basis for Alex's claimed surname DeLarge in the 1971 film.
George, Georgie or Georgie Boy: Effectively Alex's greedy second-in-command. Georgie attempts to undermine Alex's status as leader of the gang and take over their gang as the new leader. He is later killed during a botched robbery while Alex is in prison.
Pete: The only one who does not take particular sides when the droogs fight among themselves. He later meets and marries a girl named Georgina, renouncing his violent ways and even losing his former (Nadsat) speech patterns. A chance encounter with Pete in the final chapter influences Alex to realise that he has grown bored with violence and recognise that human energy is better expended on creation than destruction.[11]
Dim: An idiotic and thoroughly gormless member of the gang, persistently condescended to by Alex, but respected to some extent by his droogs for his formidable fighting abilities, his weapon of choice being a length of bike chain. He later becomes a police officer, exacting his revenge on Alex for the abuse he once suffered under his command.
P. R. Deltoid: A criminal rehabilitation social worker assigned the task of keeping Alex on the straight and narrow. He seemingly has no clue about dealing with young people, and is devoid of empathy or understanding for his troublesome charge. Indeed, when Alex is arrested for murdering an old woman and then ferociously beaten by several police officers, Deltoid simply spits on him.
Prison Chaplain: The character who first questions whether it is moral to turn a violent person into a behavioural automaton who can make no choice in such matters. This is the only character who is truly concerned about Alex's welfare; he is not taken seriously by Alex, though. He is nicknamed by Alex "prison charlie" or "chaplin", a pun on Charlie Chaplin.
Billyboy: A rival of Alex's. Early on in the story, Alex and his droogs battle Billyboy and his droogs, which ends abruptly when the police arrive. Later, after Alex is released from prison, Billyboy (along with Dim, who like Billyboy has become a police officer) rescues Alex from a mob, then subsequently beats him in a location out of town.
Prison Governor: The man who decides to let Alex "choose" to be the first reformed by the Ludovico technique.
The Minister of the Interior: The government high-official who determined that the Ludovico's technique will be used to cut recidivism. He is referred to as the Minister of Interior or Inferior by Alex.
Dr Branom: A scientist, co-developer of the Ludovico technique. He appears friendly and almost paternal towards Alex at first, before forcing him into the theatre and what Alex calls the "chair of torture".
Dr Brodsky: Branom's colleague and co-developer of the Ludovico technique. He seems much more passive than Branom and says considerably less.
F. Alexander: An author who was in the process of typing his magnum opus A Clockwork Orange when Alex and his droogs broke into his house, beat him, tore up his work and then brutally gang-raped his wife, which caused her subsequent death. He is left deeply scarred by these events and when he encounters Alex two years later, he uses him as a guinea pig in a sadistic experiment intended to prove the Ludovico technique unsound. The government imprisons him afterwards. He is given the name Frank Alexander in the film.
Cat Woman: An indirectly named woman who blocks Alex's gang's entrance scheme, and threatens to shoot Alex and set her cats on him if he does not leave. After Alex breaks into her house, she fights with him, ordering her cats to join the melee, but reprimands Alex for fighting them off. She sustains a fatal blow to the head during the scuffle. She is given the name Miss Weathers in the film.


## Analysis


### Background
A Clockwork Orange was written in Hove, then a senescent English seaside town.[12] Burgess had arrived back in Britain after his stint abroad to see that much had changed. A youth culture had developed, based around coffee bars, pop music and teenage gangs.[13] England was gripped by fears over juvenile delinquency.[12] Burgess stated that the novel's inspiration was his first wife Lynne's beating by a gang of drunk American servicemen stationed in England during World War II. She subsequently miscarried.[12][14] In its investigation of free will, the book's target is ostensibly the concept of behaviourism, pioneered by such figures as B. F. Skinner.[15] Burgess later stated that he wrote the book in three weeks.[12]


### Title
Burgess has offered several clarifications about the meaning and origin of its title:
He had overheard the phrase "as queer as a clockwork orange" in a London pub in 1945 and assumed it was a Cockney expression. In Clockwork Marmalade, an essay published in the Listener in 1972, he said that he had heard the phrase several times since that occasion. He also explained the title in response to a question from William Everson on the television programme Camera Three in 1972, Well, the title has a very different meaning but only to a particular generation of London Cockneys. It's a phrase which I heard many years ago and so fell in love with, I wanted to use it, the title of the book. But the phrase itself I did not make up. The phrase "as queer as a clockwork orange" is good old East London slang and it didn't seem to me necessary to explain it. Now, obviously, I have to give it an extra meaning. I've implied an extra dimension. I've implied the junction of the organic, the lively, the sweet – in other words, life, the orange – and the mechanical, the cold, the disciplined. I've brought them together in this kind of oxymoron, this sour-sweet word.— Anthony Burgess, An examination of Kubrick's A Clockwork Orange[16][17]
Well, the title has a very different meaning but only to a particular generation of London Cockneys. It's a phrase which I heard many years ago and so fell in love with, I wanted to use it, the title of the book. But the phrase itself I did not make up. The phrase "as queer as a clockwork orange" is good old East London slang and it didn't seem to me necessary to explain it. Now, obviously, I have to give it an extra meaning. I've implied an extra dimension. I've implied the junction of the organic, the lively, the sweet – in other words, life, the orange – and the mechanical, the cold, the disciplined. I've brought them together in this kind of oxymoron, this sour-sweet word.
— Anthony Burgess, An examination of Kubrick's A Clockwork Orange[16][17]
No other record of the expression being used before 1962 has ever appeared,[18] with Kingsley Amis going so far as to note in his Memoirs (1991) that no trace of it appears in Eric Partridge's Dictionary of Historical Slang. However, saying "as queer as ..." followed by an improbable object: "... a clockwork orange", or "... a four-speed walking stick" or "... a left-handed corkscrew" etc. predates Burgess's novel.[19] An early example, "as queer as Dick's hatband", appeared in 1796,[20] and was alluded to in 1757.[21]
His second explanation was that it was a pun on the Malay word orang, meaning "man". The novella contains no other Malay words or links.[18]
In a prefatory note to A Clockwork Orange: A Play with Music, he wrote that the title was a metaphor for "an organic entity, full of juice and sweetness and agreeable odour, being turned into a mechanism".[18]
In his essay Clockwork Oranges, Burgess asserts that "this title would be appropriate for a story about the application of Pavlovian or mechanical laws to an organism which, like a fruit, was capable of colour and sweetness".[22]
While addressing the reader in a letter before some editions of the book, the author says that when a man ceases to have free will, they are no longer a man. "Just a clockwork orange", a shiny, appealing object, but "just a toy to be wound-up by either God or the Devil, or (what is increasingly replacing both) the State."
This title alludes to the protagonist's negative emotional responses to feelings of evil which prevent the exercise of his free will subsequent to the administration of the Ludovico Technique. To induce this conditioning, Alex is forced to watch scenes of violence on a screen that are systematically paired with negative physical stimulation. The negative physical stimulation takes the form of nausea and "feelings of terror", which are caused by an emetic medicine administered just before the presentation of the films.[3]
In its original drafts, Burgess used the working title 'The Ludovico Technique,' as he himself described in the foreword in the April 1995 publication. Along with removing the 21st chapter as insisted by his publisher in the original 1962 edition, he would also change the finished product's name to its current title.


### Use of slang
The book, narrated by Alex, contains many words in a slang argot which Burgess invented for the book, called Nadsat. It is a mix of modified Slavic words, Cockney rhyming slang and derived Russian (like baboochka). For instance, these terms have the following meanings in Nadsat: droog (друг) = friend; moloko (молоко) = milk; gulliver (голова) = head; malchick (мальчик) or malchickiwick = boy; soomka (сумка) = sack or bag; Bog (Бог) = God; horrorshow (хорошо) = good; prestoopnick (преступник) = criminal; rooker (рука) = hand; cal (кал) = crap; veck (человек) = man or guy; litso (лицо) = face; malenky (маленький) = little; and so on. Some words Burgess invented himself or just adapted from existing languages. Compare Polari.
One of Alex's doctors explains the language to a colleague as "odd bits of old rhyming slang; a bit of gypsy talk, too. But most of the roots are Slav propaganda. Subliminal penetration." Some words are not derived from anything, but merely easy to guess, e.g. "in-out, in-out" or "the old in-out" means sexual intercourse. Cutter, however, means "money", because "cutter" rhymes with "bread-and-butter"; this is rhyming slang, which is intended to be impenetrable to outsiders (especially eavesdropping policemen). Additionally, slang like appypolly loggy ("apology") seems to derive from school boy slang. This reflects Alex's age of 15.
In the first edition of the book, no key was provided, and the reader was left to interpret the meaning from the context. In his appendix to the restored edition, Burgess explained that the slang would keep the book from seeming dated, and served to muffle "the raw response of pornography" from the acts of violence.
The term "ultraviolence", referring to excessive or unjustified violence, was coined by Burgess in the book, which includes the phrase "do the ultra-violent". The term's association with aesthetic violence has led to its use in the media.[23][24][25][26]


### Banning and censorship history in the US
The first major incident of censorship of A Clockwork Orange took place in 1973, when a bookseller was arrested for selling the novel (although the charges were later dropped).[27] In 1976, A Clockwork Orange was removed from an Aurora, Colorado high school because of "objectionable language". A year later in 1977 it was removed from high school classrooms in Westport, Massachusetts over similar concerns with "objectionable" language. In 1982, it was removed from two Anniston, Alabama libraries, later to be reinstated on a restricted basis. However, each of these instances came after the release of Stanley Kubrick's popular 1971 film adaptation of A Clockwork Orange, itself the subject of much controversy after exposing a much larger part of the populace to the themes of the novel. In 2024 the book was banned in Texas by the Katy Independent School District on the basis that the novel is "adopting, supporting, or promoting gender fluidity"[28][29] despite also pronouncing a bullying policy that protects infringements on the rights of the student.[30]


## Reception


### Initial response
The Sunday Telegraph review was positive, and described the book as "entertaining ... even profound".[31] Kingsley Amis in The Observer acclaimed the novel as "cheerful horror", writing "Mr Burgess has written a fine farrago of outrageousness, one which incidentally suggests a view of juvenile violence I can't remember having met before".[32] Malcolm Bradbury wrote "All of Mr Burgess's powers as a comic writer, which are considerable, have gone into the rich language of his inverted Utopia. If you can stomach the horrors, you'll enjoy the manner". Roald Dahl called it "a terrifying and marvellous book".[33] Many reviewers praised the inventiveness of the language, but expressed unease at the violent subject matter. The Spectator praised Burgess's "extraordinary technical feat" but was uncomfortable with "a certain arbitrariness about the plot which is slightly irritating". New Statesman acclaimed Burgess for addressing "acutely and savagely the tendencies of our time" but called the book "a great strain to read".[33] The Sunday Times review was negative, and described the book as "a very ordinary, brutal and psychologically shallow story".[34] The Times also reviewed the book negatively, describing it as "a somewhat clumsy experiment with science fiction [with] clumsy cliches about juvenile delinquency".[35] The violence was criticised as "unconvincing in detail".[35]


### Writer's appraisal
Burgess dismissed A Clockwork Orange as "too didactic to be artistic".[36] He said that the violent content of the novel "nauseated" him.[37]
In 1985, Burgess published Flame into Being: The Life and Work of D. H. Lawrence and while discussing Lady Chatterley's Lover in his biography, Burgess compared the notoriety of D. H. Lawrence's novel with A Clockwork Orange: "We all suffer from the popular desire to make the known notorious. The book I am best known for, or only known for, is a novel I am prepared to repudiate: written a quarter of a century ago, a jeu d'esprit knocked off for money in three weeks, it became known as the raw material for a film which seemed to glorify sex and violence. The film made it easy for readers of the book to misunderstand what it was about, and the misunderstanding will pursue me until I die. I should not have written the book because of this danger of misinterpretation, and the same may be said of Lawrence and Lady Chatterley's Lover."[38]


### Awards and nominations and rankings
1983 – Prometheus Award (Preliminary Nominee)
1999 – Prometheus Award (Nomination)
2002 – Prometheus Award (Nomination)
2003 – Prometheus Award (Nomination)
2006 – Prometheus Award (Nomination)[39]
2008 – Prometheus Award (Hall of Fame Award)
A Clockwork Orange was chosen by Time magazine as one of the 100 best English-language books from 1923 to 2005.[4]


## Adaptations
A 1965 film by Andy Warhol entitled Vinyl was an adaptation of Burgess's novel.[40]
The best known adaptation of the novel is the 1971 film A Clockwork Orange by Stanley Kubrick, with Malcolm McDowell as Alex.[41] In 1987, Burgess published a stage play titled A Clockwork Orange: A Play with Music. The play includes songs, written by Burgess, which are inspired by Beethoven and Nadsat slang.[42]
A manga anthology by Osamu Tezuka entitled Tokeijikake no Ringo (Clockwork Apple) was released in 1983.[43]
In 1988, a German adaptation of A Clockwork Orange at the intimate theatre of Bad Godesberg featured a musical score by the German punk rock band Die Toten Hosen which, combined with orchestral clips of Beethoven's Ninth Symphony and "other dirty melodies" (so stated by the subtitle), was released on the album Ein kleines bisschen Horrorschau. The track Hier kommt Alex became one of the band's signature songs.
In February 1990, another musical version was produced at the Barbican Theatre in London by the Royal Shakespeare Company. Titled A Clockwork Orange: 2004, it received mostly negative reviews, with John Peter of The Sunday Times of London calling it "only an intellectual Rocky Horror Show", and John Gross of The Sunday Telegraph calling it "a clockwork lemon". Even Burgess himself, who wrote the script based on his novel, was disappointed. According to The Evening Standard, he called the score, written by Bono and The Edge of the rock group U2, "neo-wallpaper". Burgess had originally worked alongside the director of the production, Ron Daniels, and envisioned a musical score that was entirely classical. Unhappy with the decision to abandon that score, he heavily criticised the band's experimental mix of hip-hop, liturgical, and gothic music. Lise Hand of The Irish Independent reported The Edge as saying that Burgess's original conception was "a score written by a novelist rather than a songwriter". Calling it "meaningless glitz", Jane Edwardes of 20/20 magazine said that watching this production was "like being invited to an expensive French Restaurant – and being served with a Big Mac."
In 1994, Chicago's Steppenwolf Theater put on a production of A Clockwork Orange directed by Terry Kinney. The American premiere of novelist Anthony Burgess's own adaptation of his A Clockwork Orange starred K. Todd Freeman as Alex. In 2001, UNI Theatre (Mississauga, Ontario) presented the Canadian premiere of the play under the direction of Terry Costa.[44]
In 2002, Godlight Theatre Company presented the New York Premiere adaptation of A Clockwork Orange at Manhattan Theatre Source. The production went on to play at the SoHo Playhouse (2002), Ensemble Studio Theatre (2004), 59E59 Theaters (2005) and the Edinburgh Festival Fringe (2005). While at Edinburgh, the production received rave reviews from the press while playing to sold-out audiences. The production was directed by Godlight's artistic director, Joe Tantalo.
In 2003, Los Angeles director Brad Mays[45] and the ARK Theatre Company staged a multi-media adaptation of A Clockwork Orange,[46][47] which was named "Pick of the Week" by the LA Weekly and nominated for three of the 2004 LA Weekly Theater Awards: Direction, Revival Production (of a 20th-century work), and Leading Female Performance.[48] Vanessa Claire Smith won Best Actress for her gender-bending portrayal of Alex, the music-loving teenage sociopath.[49] This production utilised three separate video streams outputted to seven onstage video monitors – six 19-inch and one 40-inch. In order to preserve the first-person narrative of the book, a pre-recorded video stream of Alex, "your humble narrator", was projected onto the 40-inch monitor,[50] thereby freeing the onstage character during passages which would have been awkward or impossible to sustain in the breaking of the fourth wall.[51]
An adaptation of the work, based on the original novel, the film and Burgess's own stage version, was performed by the SiLo Theatre in Auckland, New Zealand in early 2007.[52]
In 2021, the International Anthony Burgess Foundation premiered a webpage cataloging various productions of A Clockwork Orange from around the world.[53]


## See also
Novels portal
Speculative fiction portal
Classical conditioning
List of cultural references to A Clockwork Orange
List of stories set in a future now in the past
MKUltra
Violence in art


## References
^ "Books of The Times". The New York Times. 19 March 1963. Archived from the original on 2 February 2017. Retrieved 4 February 2017.
^ "Appendix:A Clockwork Orange – Wiktionary". en.wiktionary.org. Archived from the original on 12 June 2018. Retrieved 12 June 2018.
^ a b "A Clockwork Orange – The book versus the Film". Archived from the original on 17 August 2013. Retrieved 19 September 2013.
^ a b Grossman, Lev; Lacayo, Richard (16 October 2005). "All-Time 100 Novels: The Complete List". Time.
^ "100 Best Novels" Archived 23 November 2015 at the Wayback Machine. Modern Library. Retrieved 31 October 2012
^ Humphreys, Adrian (11 November 2012). "A clockwork original: McMaster University bought manuscript of iconic novel for $250". National Post. Archived from the original on 25 December 2012. Retrieved 13 November 2012.
^ "The Big Jubilee Read: A literary celebration of Queen Elizabeth II's record-breaking reign". BBC. 17 April 2022. Retrieved 14 July 2022.
^ a b Podgorski, Daniel (1 March 2016). "Burgess' Myopic Morality: Why Anthony Burgess' Infamous A Clockwork Orange is Stronger Without its Original Last Chapter". The Gemsbok. Archived from the original on 14 April 2016. Retrieved 14 April 2016.
^ Burgess, Anthony (1995). "Introduction: A Clockwork Orange Resucked". A Clockwork Orange. New York: W. W. Norton & Company. pp. ix–xv.
^ Ciment, Michel (1981). "Kubrick on A Clockwork Orange". The Kubrick Site. Archived from the original on 24 December 2012. Retrieved 14 April 2016.
^ A Clockwork Orange Resucked Archived 22 June 2013 at the Wayback Machine. The Floating Library. Retrieved on 2013-10-31.
^ a b c d Ahmed, Samira (3 July 2012). "A Clockwork Orange – interview with Will Self". Nightwaves (Interview). BBC. Archived from the original on 3 September 2019. Retrieved 31 December 2014.
^ A Clockwork Orange (Penguin Modern Classics) (Paperback) by Anthony Burgess, Blake Morrison xv
^ Burgess, A. A Clockwork Orange, Penguin UK, 2011, introduction by Blake Morrison, page 17 : " his first wife, Lynne, was beaten, kicked and robbed in London by a gang of four GI deserters ".
^ A Clockwork Orange (Hardback) by Anthony Burgess, Will Self
^ An examination of Kubrick's A Clockwork Orange Archived 9 November 2016 at the Wayback Machine Camera Three: Creative Arts Television, 2010-08-04. (Video)
^ Clockwork Orange: A review with William Everson Archived 10 July 2012 at the Wayback Machine. Retrieved: 2012-03-11.
^ a b c Dexter, Gary (2008). Why Not Catch-21?: The Stories Behind the Titles. Frances Lincoln Ltd. pp. 200–203. ISBN 978-0-7112-2925-9.
^ Dalzell, Tom; Victor, Terry (26 June 2015). The New Partridge Dictionary of Slang and Unconventional English. Routledge. ISBN 978-1-317-37252-3. Archived from the original on 8 July 2020. Retrieved 30 June 2020.
^ Grose, Francis (1796). "A Classical Dictionary of the Vulgar Tongue". Archived from the original on 11 July 2020. Retrieved 30 June 2020.
^ Hutton, Charles (1775). "The Diarian Miscellany: Consisting of All the Useful and Entertaining Parts, Both Mathematical and Poetical, Extracted from the Ladies' Diary, from the Beginning of that Work in the Year 1704, Down to the End of the Year 1773. With Many Additional Solutions and Improvements".
^ Burgess, Anthony (2013). 1985. Profile Books. ISBN 978-1-84765-893-7. Archived from the original on 25 February 2021. Retrieved 30 June 2020.
^ "Gruesome 'Saw 4' slashes through North American box-office". Agence France-Presse. 29 October 2007. Archived from the original on 16 January 2008. Retrieved 15 January 2008.
^ "Q&A With 'Hostel' Director Eli Roth and Quentin Tarantino". New York. 29 December 2005. Archived from the original on 9 January 2008. Retrieved 15 January 2008.
^ "ADV Announces New Gantz Collection, Final Guyver & More: Nov 6 Releases". Archived from the original on 5 February 2008. Retrieved 15 January 2008.
^ ""Manhunt 2": Most Violent Game Yet?, Critics Say New Video Game Is Too Realistic; Players Must Torture, Kill". CBS News. 30 October 2007. Archived from the original on 2 January 2008. Retrieved 15 January 2008.
^ "Banned & Challenged Classics". American Library Association. 26 March 2013. Archived from the original on 11 October 2018. Retrieved 11 October 2018.
^ Goodman, Claire (27 November 2024). "Katy ISD bans 14 new books, from 'Slaughterhouse-Five' to 'Wicked.' Here's what to know". Houston Chronicle. Archived from the original on 20 January 2025. Retrieved 21 February 2025.
^ "Instructional Resources Information". Katy Independent School District. Archived from the original on 29 November 2024. Retrieved 21 February 2025.
^ https://www.katyisd.org/Page/4123
^ Chitty, Susan. "Is That the Lot?" Sunday Telegraph, 13 May 1962, p. 9.
^ Amis, Kingsley From the Observer archive, 13 May 1962: A Clockwork Orange reviewed The Guardian
^ a b "A Clockwork Orange and the Critics". The International Anthony Burgess Foundation. 14 June 2023.
^ Brooks, Jeremy. "A Bedsitter in Dublin". Sunday Times, 13 May 1962, p. 32.
^ a b "New Fiction". Times, 17 May 1962, p. 16.
^ A Clockwork Orange (Penguin Modern Classics) (Paperback) by Anthony Burgess, Blake Morrison xxii
^ Calder,, John Mackenzie, and Anthony Burgess. "Ugh". The Times Literary Supplement, 2 January 1964, p. 9.
^ Flame into Being: The Life and Work of D. H. Lawrence (Heinemann, London 1985) Anthony Burgess, p 205
^ "Libertarian Futurist Society". Lfs.org. Archived from the original on 2 May 2006. Retrieved 3 January 2014.
^ Dargis, Manohla (27 November 2009). "Working With Andy the Auteur". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 21 February 2019. Retrieved 20 February 2019.
^ Canby, Vincent (20 December 1971). "A Clockwork Orange (1971) 'A Clockwork Orange' Dazzles the Senses and Mind". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 16 May 2012. Retrieved 4 February 2017.
^ "A Clockwork Orange on Stage". anthonyburgess.org. International Anthony Burgess Foundation. 5 September 2011. Archived from the original on 29 March 2015. Retrieved 27 March 2015.
^ "Clockwork Apple (Manga)". Tezuka in English. 21 April 2017. Retrieved 26 January 2021.
^ "Mirateca Arts". Mirateca.com. Archived from the original on 14 October 2013. Retrieved 3 January 2014.
^ "Brad Mays". Brad Mays. Archived from the original on 20 October 2013. Retrieved 3 January 2014.
^ "Production Photos from A Clockwork Orange, 2003, ARK Theatre Company, directed by Brad Mays". Bradmays.com. Archived from the original on 4 October 2011. Retrieved 3 January 2014.
^ Kavner, Lucas (20 July 2011). "'A Clockwork Orange' Songs To Be Performed For First Time in History". Huffingtonpost.com. Archived from the original on 21 November 2011. Retrieved 28 November 2011.
^ "LA Weekly Theatre Awards Nominations A Clockwork Orange – nominations for "Best Revival Production," "Best Leading Female Performance," "Best Direction"". Laweekly.com. 12 February 2004. Archived from the original on 22 December 2014. Retrieved 3 January 2014.
^ "LA Weekly Theatre Awards A Clockwork Orange – Vanessa Claire Smith wins for "Best Leading Female Performance"". Laweekly.com. 29 April 2004. Archived from the original on 25 May 2011. Retrieved 3 January 2014.
^ "Brad Mays (image)". Archived from the original on 30 October 2008. Retrieved 3 January 2014.
^ "Brad Mays Gallery: A Clockwork Orange". Bradmays.com. Archived from the original on 20 October 2013. Retrieved 3 January 2014.
^ Burrows, Melanya (28 January 2005). "Addicted to Droogs". The New Zealand Herald. Archived from the original on 29 September 2007. Retrieved 14 August 2007.
^ "A Clockwork Orange on Stage". 14 June 2023.


## Further reading
A Clockwork Orange: A Play With Music. Century Hutchinson Ltd. (1987). An extract is quoted on several web sites: Anthony Burgess from A Clockwork Orange: A Play With Music (Century Hutchinson Ltd, 1987), anthony burgess on A Clockwork Orange – page 2 at the Wayback Machine (archived 15 December 2005), A Clockwork Orange – From A Clockwork Orange: A Play With Music
Burgess, Anthony (1978). "Clockwork Oranges". In 1985. London: Hutchinson. ISBN 978-0-09-136080-1 (extracts quoted here)
Vidal, Gore (1988). "Why I Am Eight Years Younger Than Anthony Burgess". At Home: Essays, 1982–1988. New York: Random House. p. 411. ISBN 978-0-394-57020-4.
Tuck, Donald H. (1974). The Encyclopedia of Science Fiction and Fantasy. Chicago: Advent. p. 72. ISBN 978-0-911682-20-5.


## External links
A Clockwork Orange title listing at the Internet Speculative Fiction Database
A Clockwork Orange at SparkNotes
A Clockwork Orange Archived 4 February 2009 at the Wayback Machine at Literapedia
A Clockwork Orange (1962) |Last chapter |Anthony Burgess (1917–1993)
Dalrymple, Theodore. "A Prophetic and Violent Masterpiece", City Journal
Giola, Ted. "A Clockwork Orange by Anthony Burgess" Archived 30 June 2020 at the Wayback Machine at Conceptual Fiction Archived 21 April 2021 at the Wayback Machine
Priestley, Brenton. "Of Clockwork Apples and Oranges: Burgess and Kubrick (2002)"
v
t
e
Vinyl
A Clockwork Orange soundtrack A Clockwork Orange: Wendy Carlos's Complete Original Score
soundtrack
A Clockwork Orange: Wendy Carlos's Complete Original Score
Nadsat
Alex
List of cultural references to A Clockwork Orange
v
t
e
The Long Day Wanes Time for a Tiger The Enemy in the Blanket Beds in the East
Time for a Tiger
The Enemy in the Blanket
Beds in the East
The Right to an Answer
The Doctor Is Sick
The Worm and the Ring
Devil of a State
One Hand Clapping
A Clockwork Orange
The Wanting Seed
Honey for the Bears
Inside Mr Enderby
The Eve of Saint Venus
Nothing Like the Sun
A Vision of Battlements
Tremor of Intent
Enderby Outside
M/F
Napoleon Symphony
The Clockwork Testament
Beard's Roman Women
ABBA ABBA
1985
Man of Nazareth
Earthly Powers
The End of the World News
Enderby's Dark Lady
The Kingdom of the Wicked
The Pianoplayers
Any Old Iron
Mozart and the Wolf Gang
A Dead Man in Deptford
Byrne
The Devil's Mode
Moses: A Narrative
Revolutionary Sonnets
An Essay on Censorship
Homage to Qwert Yuiop
One Man's Chorus
Shakespeare
Joysprick
Ninety-Nine Novels
Language Made Plain
A Mouthful of Air
Blooms of Dublin
Sinfoni Melayu
Little Wilson and Big God
You've Had Your Time


URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Man_in_the_High_Castle
Content:

The Man in the High Castle is an alternative history novel by Philip K. Dick, first published in 1962, which imagines a world in which the Axis Powers won World War II. The story occurs in 1962, fifteen years after the end of the war in 1947, and depicts the life of several characters living under Imperial Japan or Nazi Germany as they rule a partitioned United States. The eponymous character is the mysterious author of a novel-within-the-novel entitled The Grasshopper Lies Heavy, a subversive alternative history of the war in which the Allied Powers are victorious.
Dick's thematic inspirations include the alternative history of the American Civil War, Bring the Jubilee (1953), by Ward Moore, and the I Ching, a Chinese book of divination that features in the story and the actions of the characters. The Man in the High Castle won the Hugo Award for Best Novel in 1963, and was adapted to television for Amazon Prime Video as The Man in the High Castle in 2015.


## Synopsis


### Background
In the alternative history imagined in The Man in the High Castle, Giuseppe Zangara assassinates President-elect Franklin D. Roosevelt in 1933, resulting in the continuation of the Great Depression and the policy of United States non-interventionism at the start of World War II in 1939. American inaction allows Nazi Germany to conquer and annex continental Europe and the Soviet Union into the Reich. The exterminations of the Jews, the Romani, the Jehovah's Witnesses, the Slavs, and all other peoples whom the Nazis considered subhuman ensued. The Axis powers then jointly conquered Africa, and still compete for the control of South America in 1962.[1] Imperial Japan won the war in the Pacific and invaded the West Coast of the United States, while Nazi Germany invaded the East Coast; the surrender of the Allies ended World War II in 1947.
By 1962, Imperial Japan and Nazi Germany are the world's superpowers, fighting a geopolitical cold war over the world, and in particular over the former United States and South America. Japan extended the Co-Prosperity Pacific Alliance with the establishment of the Pacific States of America (PSA), with the politically neutral Rocky Mountain States acting as a buffer against the Nazi territory to the east. Nazi North America is composed of two countries: The South, and the northeastern part of the former contiguous United States of America, which is referred to as "the U.S." in the book, both of which are ruled by collaborationist pro-Nazi puppet regimes. Canada remains an independent country.
The aged Adolf Hitler is incapacitated by tertiary syphilis, Martin Bormann is the acting Chancellor of Germany, and many high-ranking Nazi leaders—Joseph Goebbels, Reinhard Heydrich, Hermann Göring, and Arthur Seyss-Inquart—still survive and vie to succeed Hitler as the Führer of the Greater Germanic Reich. Technologically, the Nazis have drained the Mediterranean Sea for Lebensraum and farmland, developed and used the hydrogen bomb, developed rockets for traveling throughout the world and into outer space, and have undertaken colonization missions to the Moon and to the planets Venus and Mars.


### Plot
In 1962, it has been fifteen years since Imperial Japan and Nazi Germany won World War II. In San Francisco, in the Pacific States of America, Japanese judicial racism has enslaved black people and reduced the Chinese residents to second-class citizens. Businessman Robert Childan owns an antique shop there that specializes in Americana for a Japanese clientele who fetishize cultural artifacts of the former United States. One day, Childan receives a request from Nobusuke Tagomi, a high-ranking trade official, who seeks a gift to impress a Swedish industrialist named Baynes. Childan cannot fulfill Tagomi's original request (a civil war recruiting poster) but is able to present various alternatives because he is well-stocked with counterfeit antiques made by the metal works Wyndam-Matson Corporation.
Recently fired from his job at a Wyndam-Matson factory, Frank Frink (formerly Fink) is a secret Jew and war veteran who agrees to join a former co-worker to start a business making and selling jewelry. Meanwhile, in the Rocky Mountain States, Frank's ex-wife, Juliana Frink, works as a judo instructor in Canon City, Colorado and, in her private life, has begun a sexual relationship with Joe Cinnadella, an Italian truck driver and ex-soldier.
Frink blackmails the Wyndam-Matson Corporation for money to finance his jewelry business, threatening to expose that they are supplying counterfeit antiques to Childan. Tagomi and Baynes meet, but Baynes repeatedly delays conducting any real business because he awaits a third party from Japan. The Nazi news media announces that Chancellor of Nazi Germany Martin Bormann has died after a short illness. Childan takes some of Frink's "authentic metalwork" jewelry on consignment in order to curry favor with a Japanese client, who, to Childan's surprise, says it possesses much Wu, spiritual awareness. Juliana and Joe travel by road to Denver, Colorado, but en route Joe impulsively decides that they take a side trip to Cheyenne, Wyoming, to meet Hawthorne Abendsen, the mysterious author of The Grasshopper Lies Heavy, a novel of speculative fiction that presents an alternate history of World War II wherein the Allies defeat the Axis. The Nazis banned the book in the U.S., but the Japanese allow its publication and sale in the Pacific States of America. Supposedly, Abendsen lives in a heavily guarded estate named the High Castle. Meanwhile, the Nazi news media inform the public that Joseph Goebbels is the new Chancellor of Nazi Germany.
After much delay, Baynes and Tagomi meet their Japanese contact, while the Sicherheitsdienst (SD), the Nazi security service, is close to arresting Baynes, who is actually Nazi defector Rudolf Wegener. Baynes warns his contact, a Japanese general, of the existence of Operation Dandelion, Goebbels's plan for a Nazi sneak attack upon the Japanese Home Islands, with the goal of destroying the Empire of Japan. Frink is exposed as a crypto-Jew and arrested by the San Francisco police. Elsewhere, two SD agents confront Baynes and Tagomi, who uses his antique American pistol to kill both agents. In Colorado, Joe changes his appearance and mannerisms before the side trip to the High Castle in Wyoming; Juliana infers that Joe intends to assassinate Abendsen. Joe reveals himself to be a Swiss Nazi when he confirms his intention; Juliana kills Joe and goes to warn Abendsen.
Wegener flies back to Germany and learns that Reinhard Heydrich (a member of the faction against Operation Dandelion) has launched a coup d'état against Goebbels, to install himself as Chancellor of Nazi Germany. Tagomi is shocked by having killed the SD agents and goes to the antiques shop to sell the pistol back to Childan; instead, sensing the spiritual energy from one of Frink's jewelry creations, Tagomi buys the jewelry. Tagomi then undergoes an intense spiritual experience during which he momentarily perceives an alternative version of San Francisco, evidenced by the Embarcadero freeway, which he has never seen and by the fact that white people do not defer to Japanese people.
Tagomi later meets with the German consul in San Francisco and compels the Germans to free Frink, whom Tagomi has never met, by refusing to sign the order of extradition to Nazi Germany. Juliana has a spiritual experience when she arrives in Cheyenne. She discovers that Abendsen lives with his family in a normal house, having abandoned the High Castle because of a changed outlook on life; thus the possibility of being assassinated no longer worries him. After evading Juliana's questions about his literary inspiration, Abendsen says he used the I Ching, a Chinese book of divination, to guide the writing of his novel. Before leaving, Juliana infers then that Truth wrote the novel to reveal the Inner Truth that Imperial Japan and Nazi Germany did lose World War II in 1945.


## The Grasshopper Lies Heavy
Several characters in The Man in the High Castle read the popular novel The Grasshopper Lies Heavy, by Hawthorne Abendsen, the title of which the readers presume derives from the Bible verse fragment: "The grasshopper shall be a burden" (Ecclesiastes 12:5). As an alternative history of the Second World War, wherein the Allies defeat the Axis Powers, the Nazi regime bans The Grasshopper Lies Heavy in the South, whereas the Pacific States of America allow the publication and sale of the counterfactual novel.[2]: 91
The Grasshopper Lies Heavy postulates that President Roosevelt survives the 1933 assassination attempt but chooses not to seek re-election in 1940. The next president, Rexford Tugwell, moves the American Pacific Fleet from Pearl Harbor, saving it from attack by the Imperial Japanese Navy, which ensures that the country is better equipped to fight the war.[2]: 70 Having retained most of their military-industrial capabilities, the United Kingdom contributes more to the Allied war effort, which facilitates the defeat of Erwin Rommel in the North African Campaign. The British fight the Axis armies through the Caucasus to join the Soviet Union and defeat the Nazis in the Battle of Stalingrad; the Kingdom of Italy reneges its membership in the Axis and betrays the Nazis; the British Army joins the Red Army in the Battle of Berlin, the decisive defeat of Nazi Germany. At war's end in 1945, Hitler and the Nazi leaders are tried as war criminals and are put to death,[2]: 131 with Hitler's last words being Deutsche, hier steh' ich ("Germans, here I stand"), in imitation of Martin Luther.
After the war, Tugwell promulgates the New Deal for the countries of the world, which finances a decade of rebuilding in China and the education of illiterate peoples in the undeveloped countries of Africa and Asia, who receive television sets by which they are taught to read and write, are instructed in digging wells and in purifying water. The New Deal financial assistance facilitates American businesses building factories in the undeveloped countries of Asia and Africa. American society is peaceful and harmonious and is at peace with the other countries of the world; the war ends the Soviet Union. Ten years after the war, still headed by Winston Churchill, the British Empire becomes militaristic, anti-American and establishes prison camps in India for Chinese subjects considered disloyal. Suspecting that the United States is sponsoring the anti-colonial subversion of British colonial rule in Asia, Churchill provokes a cold war for global hegemony; the geopolitical rivalry leads to an Anglo-American war won by the United Kingdom.[2]: 169–172


## Inspirations
Dick said that he imagined the story of The Man in the High Castle (1962) from his reading of the novel Bring the Jubilee (1953), by Ward Moore, which is an alternative history of the U.S. civil war won by the Confederacy. In the acknowledgements page of The Man in the High Castle, Dick mentions the thematic influences of the popular history The Rise and Fall of the Third Reich: A History of Nazi Germany (1960), by William L. Shirer; the biography Hitler: A Study in Tyranny (1952), by Alan Bullock; The Goebbels Diaries (1948); Foxes of the Desert (1960), by Paul Carrell; and the 1950 translation of the I Ching, by Richard Wilhelm.[3][2] As a novelist, Dick used the I Ching to craft the themes, plot and story of The Man in the High Castle, whose characters also use the I Ching to inform and guide their decisions.[3]
Dick cites the thematic influences of Japanese and Tibetan poetry upon the narrative of The Man in the High Castle; (i) The haiku in page 48 of the novel is from the first volume of the Anthology of Japanese Literature (1955), edited by Donald Keene; (ii) the waka poem in page 135 is from Zen and Japanese Culture (1955), by D. T. Suzuki and (iii) the Tibetan book of the dead, the Bardo Thodol (1960), edited by Walter Evans-Wentz and mentions the sociologic influences of the expressionist novella Miss Lonelyhearts (1933), by Nathanael West, in which an unhappy newspaper reporter pseudonymously writes the "Miss Lonelyhearts" advice column, through which he dispenses advice to emotionally forlorn readers during the Great Depression. Despite his job as Miss Lonelyhearts, the reporter seeks consolation in religion, sexual promiscuity, rural vacations and much work; no activity provides him with a sense of personal authenticity derived from his intellectual and emotional engagement with the world.[2]: 118


## Reception
Avram Davidson praised the novel as a "superior work of fiction", citing Dick's use of the I Ching as "fascinating". Davidson concluded that "It's all here—extrapolation, suspense, action, art, philosophy, plot, [and] character".[4] The Man in the High Castle secured for Dick the 1963 Hugo Award for Best Novel.[5][6][7] In a review of a paperback reprint of the novel, Robert Silverberg wrote in Amazing Stories magazine, "Dick's prose crackles with excitement, his characters are vividly real, his plot is stunning".[8]
In The Religion of Science Fiction, Frederick A. Kreuziger explores the theory of history implied by Dick's creation of the two alternative realities
Neither of the two worlds, however, the revised version of the outcome of WWII nor the fictional account of our present world, is anywhere near similar to the world we are familiar with. But they could be! This is what the book is about. The book argues that this world, described twice, although differently each time, is exactly the world we know and are familiar with. Indeed, it is the only world we know: the world of chance, luck, fate.[9]
In her introduction to the Folio Society edition of the novel, Ursula K. Le Guin writes that The Man in the High Castle "may be the first, big lasting contribution science fiction made to American literature."[10]


## Adaptations


### Audiobook
An unabridged The Man in the High Castle audiobook, read by George Guidall and running approximately 9.5 hours over seven audio cassettes, was released in 1997.[11] Another unabridged audiobook version was released in 2008 by Blackstone Audio, read by Tom Wyner (credited as Tom Weiner) and running approximately 8.5 hours over seven CDs.[12][13] A third unabridged audiobook recording was released in 2014 by Brilliance Audio, read by Jeff Cummings with a running time of 9 hours 58 minutes.[14]


### Television
After a number of attempts to adapt the book to the screen, in October 2014, Amazon's film production unit began filming the pilot episode of The Man in the High Castle in Roslyn, Washington, for release through the Amazon Prime Web video streaming service.[15][16] The pilot episode was released by Amazon Studios on January 15, 2015,[17][18] and was Amazon's "most watched pilot ever" according to Amazon Studios' vice president, Roy Price.[19] On February 18, 2015, Amazon green-lit the series.[20] The show became available for streaming on November 20, 2015.[21]


## Incomplete sequel
In a 1976 interview, Dick said he planned to write a sequel novel to The Man in the High Castle: "And so there's no real ending on it. I like to regard it as an open ending. It will segue into a sequel sometime."[22] Dick said that he had "started several times to write a sequel" but progressed little, because he was too disturbed by his original research for The Man in the High Castle and could not mentally bear "to go back and read about Nazis again".[23] He suggested that the sequel would be a collaboration with another author:
Somebody would have to come in and help me do a sequel to it. Someone who had the stomach for the stamina to think along those lines, to get into the head; if you're going to start writing about Reinhard Heydrich, for instance, you have to get into his face. Can you imagine getting into Reinhard Heydrich's face?[23]
Two chapters of the proposed sequel were published in The Shifting Realities of Philip K. Dick, a collection of his essays and other writings.[24] Eventually, Dick admitted that the proposed sequel became an unrelated novel, The Ganymede Takeover, co-written with Ray Nelson (known for writing the short story "Eight O'Clock in the Morning" filmed as They Live).
Dick's novel Radio Free Albemuth is rumored to have started as a sequel to The Man in the High Castle.[25] Dick described the plot of this early version of Radio Free Albemuth—then titled VALISystem A—writing:
... a divine and loving ETI [extraterrestrial intelligence] ... help[s] Hawthorne Abendsen, the protagonist-author in [The Man in the High Castle], continue on in his difficult life after the Nazi secret police finally got to him ... VALISystem A, located in deep space, sees to it that nothing can prevent Abendsen from finishing his novel.[25]
The novel eventually became a new story unrelated to The Man in the High Castle.[25] Dick ultimately abandoned the Albemuth book, unpublished during his lifetime, though portions were salvaged and used for 1981's VALIS.[25] Radio Free Albemuth was published in 1985, three years after Dick's death.[26]


## See also
United States portal
Novels portal
Fatherland (novel)
Hypothetical Axis victory in World War II
Turning Point: Fall of Liberty
Wolfenstein: The New Order


## References
^ The events of the book take place in 1962: in chapter 6, in reference to the killing of Joe Cinadella’s brothers in 1944, Juliana says « But it’s been — eighteen years ».
^ a b c d e f Dick, Philip K. (2011). The Man in the High Castle (1st Mariner Books ed.). Boston: Mariner Books. pp. ix–x. ISBN 978-0-547-60120-5. Retrieved December 10, 2015.
^ a b Cover, Arthur Byron (February 1974). "Interview with Philip K. Dick". Vertex. 1 (6). Retrieved July 23, 2014.
^ Davidson, Avram (June 1963). "Books". The Magazine of Fantasy & Science Fiction. 5 (1): 61. Bibcode:1963MSHT....5...61.. doi:10.1007/BF00650615.
^ "Philip K. Dick, Won Awards For Science-Fiction Works". The New York Times. March 3, 1982. Retrieved March 30, 2010.
^ "1963 Award Winners & Nominees". Worlds Without End. Retrieved September 27, 2009.
^ Wyatt, Fred (November 7, 1963). "A Brisk Bathrobe Canter At Cry Of 'Fire!' Stirs Blood". I-J Reporter's Notebook. Daily Independent Journal. San Rafael, California. Retrieved October 25, 2015 – via Newspapers.com. Belatedly I learned that Philip K. Dick of Point Reyes Station won the Hugo, the 21st World Science Fiction Convention Annual Achievement Award for the best novel of 1962.
^ Silverberg, Robert (June 1964). "The Spectroscope". Amazing Stories. 38 (6): 124. Retrieved January 30, 2021.
^ Kreuziger, Frederick A. (1986). In The Religion of Science Fiction. Popular Press. p. 82. ISBN 9780879723675. Retrieved July 27, 2016. man in the high castle cynical.
^ Dick, Philip K. (2015). The Man in the High Castle. London: Folio Society.
^ Willis, Jesse (May 29, 2003). "Review of The Man In The High Castle by Philip K. Dick". SFFaudio. Retrieved December 10, 2015.
^ "The Man in the High Castle". BlackstoneAudio.com. Archived from the original on August 9, 2010. Retrieved January 10, 2016.
^ L.B. "Audiobook review: The Man in the High Castle by Philip K. Dick, read by Tom Weiner". audiofilemagazine.com. Retrieved January 10, 2016.
^ The Man in the High Castle. Audible, Inc. ISBN 978-1-4558-4037-3.
^ Muir, Pat (October 5, 2014). "Roslyn hopes new TV show brings 15 more minutes of fame". Yakima Herald. Retrieved March 28, 2017.
^ Andreeva, Nellie (July 24, 2014). "Amazon Studios Adds Drama 'The Man In The High Castle', Comedy 'Just Add Magic' To Pilot Slate". Deadline. Retrieved January 10, 2016.
^ "The Man in the High Castle: Season 1, Episode 1". Amazon. Retrieved January 17, 2015.
^ "The Man in the High Castle". Internet Movie Database. Retrieved January 18, 2015.
^ Lewis, Hilary (February 18, 2015). "Amazon Orders 5 New Series Including 'Man in the High Castle'". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved December 10, 2015.
^ Robertson, Adi (February 18, 2015). "Amazon green-lights The Man in the High Castle TV series". The Verge. Retrieved December 10, 2015.
^ Moylan, Brian (November 18, 2015). "Does The Man in the High Castle prove that the best TV is now streamed?". The Guardian. Retrieved December 10, 2015.
^ "Hour 25: A Talk With Philip K. Dick « Philip K. Dick Fan Site". Philipkdickfans.com. June 26, 1976. Retrieved December 10, 2015.
^ a b RC, Lord (2006). Pink Beam: A Philip K. Dick Companion (1st ed.). Ward, Colorado: Ganymedean Slime Mold Pubs. p. 106. ISBN 9781430324379. Retrieved December 10, 2015.[self-published source]
^ Dick, Philip K. (1995). "Part 3. Works Related to 'The Man in the High Castle' and its Proposed Sequel". In Sutin, Lawrence (ed.). The Shifting Realities of Philip K. Dick: Selected Literary and Philosophical Writings. New York: Vintage. ISBN 0-679-74787-7.
^ a b c d Pfarrer, Tony. "A Possible Man in the High Castle Sequel?". Willis E. Howard, III Home Page. Archived from the original on August 19, 2008. Retrieved July 22, 2015.
^ LC Online Catalog — Item Information (Full Record). Catalog.loc.gov. 1985. ISBN 9780877957621. Retrieved December 10, 2015.


## Further reading
Brown, William Lansing. 2006. "alternative Histories: Power, Politics, and Paranoia in Philip Roth's The Plot against America and Philip K. Dick's The Man in the High Castle", The Image of Power in Literature, Media, and Society: Selected Papers, 2006 Conference, Society for the Interdisciplinary Study of Social Imagery. Wright, Will; Kaplan, Steven (eds.); Pueblo, CO: Society for the Interdisciplinary Study of Social Imagery, Colorado State University-Pueblo; pp. 107–11.
Campbell, Laura E. 1992. "Dickian Time in The Man in the High Castle", Extrapolation, 33: 3, pp. 190–201.
Carter, Cassie, 1995. "The Metacolonization of Dick's The Man in the High Castle: Mimicry, Parasitism and Americanism in the PSA", Science Fiction Studies #67, 22:3, pp. 333–342.
DiTommaso, Lorenzo, 1999. "Redemption in Philip K. Dick's The Man in the High Castle", Science Fiction Studies # 77, 26:, pp. 91–119, DePauw University.
Fofi, Goffredo 1997. "Postfazione", Philip K. Dick, La Svastica sul Sole, Roma, Fanucci, pp. 391–5.
Hayles, N. Katherine 1983. "Metaphysics and Metafiction in The Man in the High Castle", Philip K. Dick. Greenberg, M.H.; Olander, J.D. (eds.); New York: Taplinger, 1983, pp. 53–71.
Malmgren, Carl D. 1980. "Philip Dick's The Man in the High Castle and the Nature of Science Fictional Worlds", Bridges to Science Fiction. Slusser, George E.; Guffey, George R.; Rose, Mark (eds.); Carbondale and Edwardsville: Southern Illinois University Press, pp. 120–30.
Mountfort, Paul 2016. "The I Ching and Philip K. Dick's The Man in the High Castle", Science-Fiction Studies # 129, 43:, pp. 287–309.
Pagetti, Carlo, 2001a. "La svastica americana" [Introduction], Philip K. Dick, L'uomo nell'alto castello, Roma: Fanucci, pp. 7–26.
Proietti, Salvatore, 1989. "The Man in The High Castle: politica e metaromanzo", Il sogno dei simulacri. Pagetti, Carlo; Viviani, Gianfranco (eds.); Milano: Nord, 1989 pp. 34–41.
Rieder, John 1988. "The Metafictive World of The Man in the High Castle: Hermeneutics, Ethics, and Political Ideology", Science-Fiction Studies # 45, 15.2: 214–25.
Rossi, Umberto, 2000. "All Around the High Castle: Narrative Voices and Fictional Visions in Philip K. Dick's The Man in the High Castle", Telling the Stories of America — History, Literature and the Arts — Proceedings of the 14th AISNA Biennial conference (Pescara, 1997), Clericuzio, A.; Goldoni, Annalisa; Mariani, Andrea (eds.); Roma: Nuova Arnica, pp. 474–83.
Simons, John L. 1985. "The Power of Small Things in Philip K. Dick's The Man in the High Castle". The Rocky Mountain Review of Language and Literature, 39:4, pp. 261–75.
Warrick, Patricia, 1992. "The Encounter of Taoism and Fascism in The Man in the High Castle", On Philip K. Dick, Mullen et al. (eds.); Terre Haute and Greencastle: SF-TH Inc. 1992, pp. 27–52.


## External links
The Man in the High Castle title listing at the Internet Speculative Fiction Database
The Man in the High Castle cover art gallery
The Man in the High Castle at the Internet Book List
The Man in the High Castle at Worlds Without End
v
t
e
Bibliography
Lost works
Gather Yourselves Together (1950)
Voices from the Street (1952)
Solar Lottery (1954)
Mary and the Giant (1954)
The World Jones Made (1954)
Eye in the Sky (1955)
The Man Who Japed (1955)
A Time for George Stavros (1956)
Pilgrim on the Hill (1956)
The Broken Bubble (1956)
The Cosmic Puppets (1957)
Puttering About in a Small Land (1957)
Nicholas and the Higs (1958)
Time Out of Joint (1958)
In Milton Lumky Territory (1958)
Confessions of a Crap Artist (1959)
The Man Whose Teeth Were All Exactly Alike (1960)
Humpty Dumpty in Oakland (1960)
Vulcan's Hammer (1960)
Dr. Futurity (1960)
The Man in the High Castle (1961)
We Can Build You (1962)
Martian Time-Slip (1962)
Dr. Bloodmoney, or How We Got Along After the Bomb (1963)
The Game-Players of Titan (1963)
The Simulacra (1963)
The Crack in Space (1963)
Clans of the Alphane Moon (1964)
The Three Stigmata of Palmer Eldritch (1964)
The Zap Gun (1964)
The Penultimate Truth (1964)
The Unteleported Man (1964)
The Ganymede Takeover (1965)
Counter-Clock World (1965)
Do Androids Dream of Electric Sheep? (1966)
Nick and the Glimmung (1966)
Now Wait for Last Year (1966)
Ubik (1966)
Galactic Pot-Healer (1968)
A Maze of Death (1968)
Our Friends from Frolix 8 (1969)
Flow My Tears, the Policeman Said (1974)
Deus Irae (1976)
Radio Free Albemuth (1976; published 1985)
A Scanner Darkly (1977)
Valis (1981)
The Divine Invasion (1981)
The Transmigration of Timothy Archer (1982)
The Owl in Daylight (unfinished)
A Handful of Darkness (1955)
The Variable Man (1956)
The Preserving Machine (1969)
The Book of Philip K. Dick (1973)
The Best of Philip K. Dick (1977)
The Golden Man (1980)
Robots, Androids, and Mechanical Oddities (1984)
I Hope I Shall Arrive Soon (1985)
The Collected Stories of Philip K. Dick (1987)
Beyond Lies the Wub (1988)
The Dark Haired Girl (1989)
The Father-Thing (1989)
Second Variety (1989)
The Days of Perky Pat (1990)
The Little Black Box (1990)
The Short Happy Life of the Brown Oxford (1990)
We Can Remember It for You Wholesale (1990)
The Minority Report (1991)
Second Variety (1991)
The Eye of the Sibyl (1992)
The Philip K. Dick Reader (1997)
Minority Report (2002)
Selected Stories of Philip K. Dick (2002)
Paycheck (2004)
Vintage PKD (2006)
The Exegesis of Philip K. Dick (2011)
"Beyond Lies the Wub" (1952)
"The Gun" (1952)
"The Skull" (1952)
"The Little Movement" (1952)
"The Defenders" (1953)
"Mr. Spaceship" (1953)
"Piper in the Woods" (1953)
"Roog" (1953)
"The Infinites" (1953)
"Second Variety" (1953)
"Colony" (1953)
"The Cookie Lady" (1953)
"Impostor" (1953)
"Paycheck" (1953)
"The Preserving Machine" (1953)
"Expendable" (1953)
"The Indefatigable Frog" (1953)
"The Commuter" (1953)
"Out in the Garden" (1953)
"The Great C" (1953)
"The King of the Elves" (1953)
"The Trouble with Bubbles" (1953)
"The Variable Man" (1953)
"The Impossible Planet" (1953)
"Planet for Transients" (1953)
"The Builder" (1953)
"Tony and the Beetles" (1953)
"The Hanging Stranger" (1953)
"Prize Ship" (1954)
"Beyond the Door" (1954)
"The Crystal Crypt" (1954)
"The Short Happy Life of the Brown Oxford" (1954)
"The Golden Man" (1954)
"Sales Pitch" (1954)
"Breakfast at Twilight" (1954)
"The Crawlers" (1954)
"Exhibit Piece" (1954)
"Adjustment Team" (1954)
"Shell Game" (1954)
"Meddler" (1954)
"A World of Talent" (1954)
"The Last of the Masters" (1954)
"Upon the Dull Earth" (1954)
"The Father-thing" (1954)
"Strange Eden" (1954)
"The Turning Wheel" (1954)
"Foster, You're Dead!" (1955)
"Human Is" (1955)
"War Veteran" (1955)
"Captive Market" (1955)
"Nanny" (1955)
"The Chromium Fence" (1955)
"Service Call" (1955)
"The Mold of Yancy" (1955)
"Autofac" (1955)
"Psi-man Heal My Child!" (1955)
"The Hood Maker" (1955)
"The Minority Report" (1956)
"Pay for the Printer" (1956)
"A Glass of Darkness (The Cosmic Puppets)" (1956)
"The Unreconstructed M" (1957)
"Null-O" (1958)
"Explorers We" (1959)
"Recall Mechanism" (1959)
"Fair Game" (1959)
"War Game" (1959)
"All We Marsmen" (1963)
"What'll We Do with Ragland Park?" (1963)
"The Days of Perky Pat" (1963)
"If There Were No Benny Cemoli" (1963)
"Waterspider" (1964)
"Novelty Act" (1964)
"Oh, to Be a Blobel!" (1964)
"The War with the Fnools" (1964)
"What the Dead Men Say" (1964)
"Orpheus with Clay Feet" (1964)
"Cantata 140" (1964)
"The Unteleported Man" (1964)
"The Little Black Box" (1964)
"Retreat Syndrome" (1965)
"Project Plowshare (later "The Zap Gun")" (1965)
"We Can Remember It for You Wholesale" (1966)
"Holy Quarrel" (1966)
"Faith of Our Fathers" (1967)
"Not by Its Cover" (1968)
"The Electric Ant" (1969)
"A. Lincoln, Simulacrum" (1969)
"The Pre-persons" (1974)
"A Little Something for Us Tempunauts" (1974)
"The Exit Door Leads In" (1979)
"Rautavaara's Case" (1980)
"I Hope I Shall Arrive Soon" (1980)
"The Eye of the Sibyl" (1987)
"Stability" (1987)
"The Android and the Human" (1972)
"If You Find This World Bad, You Should See Some of the Others" (1977)
Blade Runner (1982)
Total Recall (1990)
Barjo (1992)
Screamers (1995)
Impostor (2001)
Minority Report (2002)
Paycheck (2003)
A Scanner Darkly (2006)
Next (2007)
Screamers: The Hunting (2009)
Radio Free Albemuth (2010)
The Adjustment Bureau (2011)
Total Recall (2012)
Blade Runner 2049 (2017)
2036: Nexus Dawn (2017)
2048: Nowhere to Run (2017)
Blade Runner Black Out 2022 (2017)
Total Recall 2070 (1999)
The Man in the High Castle (2015–2019)
Minority Report (2015)
Electric Dreams (2017–2018)
Blade Runner: Black Lotus (2021–2022)
Blade Runner 2099 (upcoming)
Blade Runner franchise
Only Apparently Real (1986 biography)
I Am Alive and You Are Dead (1993 biography)
Your Name Here (2008 drama film)
Isa Dick Hackett (daughter)
Philip K. Dick Award
Category
v
t
e
The Sword in the Stone by T. H. White (1939)
Slan by A. E. van Vogt (1941)
Beyond This Horizon by Anson MacDonald (1943)
Conjure Wife by Fritz Leiber (1944)
Shadow Over Mars by Leigh Brackett (1945)
The Mule by Isaac Asimov (1946)
Farmer in the Sky by Robert A. Heinlein (1951)
Fahrenheit 451 by Ray Bradbury (1954)
The Demolished Man by Alfred Bester (1953)
They'd Rather Be Right (aka: The Forever Machine) by Mark Clifton and Frank Riley (1955)
Double Star by Robert A. Heinlein (1956)
The Big Time by Fritz Leiber (1958)
A Case of Conscience by James Blish (1959)
Starship Troopers by Robert A. Heinlein (1960)
A Canticle for Leibowitz by Walter M. Miller, Jr. (1961)
Stranger in a Strange Land by Robert A. Heinlein (1962)
The Man in the High Castle by Philip K. Dick (1963)
Here Gather the Stars (aka: Way Station) by Clifford D. Simak (1964)
The Wanderer by Fritz Leiber (1965)
Dune by Frank Herbert / ...And Call Me Conrad (aka: This Immortal) by Roger Zelazny (1966)
The Moon Is a Harsh Mistress by Robert A. Heinlein (1967)
Lord of Light by Roger Zelazny (1968)
Stand on Zanzibar by John Brunner (1969)
The Left Hand of Darkness by Ursula K. Le Guin (1970)
Ringworld by Larry Niven (1971)
To Your Scattered Bodies Go by Philip José Farmer (1972)
The Gods Themselves by Isaac Asimov (1973)
Rendezvous with Rama by Arthur C. Clarke (1974)
The Dispossessed by Ursula K. Le Guin (1975)
The Forever War by Joe Haldeman (1976)
Where Late the Sweet Birds Sang by Kate Wilhelm (1977)
Gateway by Frederik Pohl (1978)
Dreamsnake by Vonda N. McIntyre (1979)
The Fountains of Paradise by Arthur C. Clarke (1980)
The Snow Queen by Joan D. Vinge (1981)
Downbelow Station by C. J. Cherryh (1982)
Foundation's Edge by Isaac Asimov (1983)
Startide Rising by David Brin (1984)
Neuromancer by William Gibson (1985)
Ender's Game by Orson Scott Card (1986)
Speaker for the Dead by Orson Scott Card (1987)
The Uplift War by David Brin (1988)
Cyteen by C. J. Cherryh (1989)
Hyperion by Dan Simmons (1990)
The Vor Game by Lois McMaster Bujold (1991)
Barrayar by Lois McMaster Bujold (1992)
A Fire Upon the Deep by Vernor Vinge / Doomsday Book by Connie Willis (1993)
Green Mars by Kim Stanley Robinson (1994)
Mirror Dance by Lois McMaster Bujold (1995)
The Diamond Age by Neal Stephenson (1996)
Blue Mars by Kim Stanley Robinson (1997)
Forever Peace by Joe Haldeman (1998)
To Say Nothing of the Dog by Connie Willis (1999)
A Deepness in the Sky by Vernor Vinge (2000)
Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire by J. K. Rowling (2001)
American Gods by Neil Gaiman (2002)
Hominids by Robert J. Sawyer (2003)
Paladin of Souls by Lois McMaster Bujold (2004)
Jonathan Strange & Mr Norrell by Susanna Clarke (2005)
Spin by Robert Charles Wilson (2006)
Rainbows End by Vernor Vinge (2007)
The Yiddish Policemen's Union by Michael Chabon (2008)
The Graveyard Book by Neil Gaiman (2009)
The Windup Girl by Paolo Bacigalupi / The City & the City by China Miéville (2010)
Blackout/All Clear by Connie Willis (2011)
Among Others by Jo Walton (2012)
Redshirts by John Scalzi (2013)
Ancillary Justice by Ann Leckie (2014)
The Three-Body Problem by Cixin Liu, translated by Ken Liu (2015)
The Fifth Season by N. K. Jemisin (2016)
The Obelisk Gate by N. K. Jemisin (2017)
The Stone Sky by N. K. Jemisin (2018)
The Calculating Stars by Mary Robinette Kowal (2019)
A Memory Called Empire by Arkady Martine (2020)
Network Effect by Martha Wells (2021)
A Desolation Called Peace by Arkady Martine (2022)
Nettle & Bone by T. Kingfisher (2023)
Some Desperate Glory by Emily Tesh (2024)
VIAF
Germany
United States
Israel
MusicBrainz work


URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Journey_Beyond_Tomorrow
Content:

Journey Beyond Tomorrow is a satirical 1962 science fiction novel by the American writer Robert Sheckley, originally serialized as The Journey of Joenes in The Magazine of Fantasy & Science Fiction in October and November 1962. A paperback edition by Signet Books followed a month later.[1]
The novel has been reprinted under both titles; most international editions use the original F&SF one.


## Synopsis
A Candide-like social satire, the narrative is the ostensible biography of an early 21st-century man named Joenes, notionally compiled in a future post-apocalyptic civilization existing on the islands of the South Pacific in the 30th or 31st centuries.
Joenes is a semi-legendary figure in this civilization, with his teachings being one of two dominant philosophies of the post-apocalyptic world. From the editor's introduction, the reader learns that a great cataclysm destroyed the world during Joenes' lifetime; that only fragmentary information from his era has survived, mostly in the form of oral tradition (which is only being compiled into written form after a gap of a thousand years); and that the people of the future have a very garbled understanding of the past. (For example, a lengthy passage on the birth of the United States in chapter four heavily conflates American history with that of classical Greece.)
Born to American expatriates on the tiny Pacific island of Manituatu, Joenes is tall, handsome, virtuous, well-read, and curious, if a bit naive and unworldly. After losing his livelihood due to a corporate restructuring in far-off America at the age of 25, he decides to visit his late parents' homeland to seek his destiny.
After arrivng in the US, Joenes' has a series of surreal encounters with different aspects of modern Western society. Each institution he interacts with turns out to be rife with bizarre, Kafkaesque dysfunction. These encounters are often of a highly philosophical and discursive nature, and sometimes verge on magical realism.
In chapter two, Joenes lands in San Francisco and meets Lum, a surprisingly-resourceful beatnik who will become his lifelong friend (as well as the founder of the other major philosophical school of the post-apocalyptic world.) Joenes tries peyote, gets into an argument on the nature of justice with a policeman, and is arrested.
In chapters three and four, Joenes is hauled before a McCarthyite Congressional commission, falsely accused of being a Communist, and remanded for sentencing by a mainframe computer tended by a priesthood of technicians (who - in a parody of the Oracle of Delphi - arrive at verdicts by freely interpreting its output of inane rhyming couplets.) The acolytes announce that the machine has issued a suspended sentence of ten years.
In chapter five, Joenes is released onto the streets of New York, where he encounters a friendly thief named Watts, who explains to him that many of the city's inhabitants are actually dead, but continue to go through the motions of life in an attempt to avoid discovery (and burial) by the living. Watts is driven away by a thuggish, sociopathic policeman, who shares his deranged philosophy of law and order with Joenes (and is about to assault him before being distracted by a jaywalker.)
In chapter six, a hitch-hiking Joenes is picked up by three disillusioned truck-drivers, each of whom somberly relate a lengthy philosophical disquisition on the ultimate emptiness of science, religion, and virtue.
Chapter seven has Joenes wander to the Hollis Home for the Criminally Insane, where he once more encounters Lum. The Home turns out to actually be an artists' colony (though there are also inmates, who are subjected to bizarre experimental treatments.) One of the inmates claims to be an incarnation of God, and can perform actual miracles, though the doctors consider these merely the proof of his lunacy. An attempt to meet this inmate fails when his cell turns up empty, with only a written message (which the doctor refuses to let Joenes see) left behind. A college professor visiting the Home to recruit new instructors offers Joenes a position.
Chapters eight and nine constitute a broad satire of academia, in which Joenes is hired to teach a course on Polynesia at a college in Newark. Once the remainder of the faculty warm to him, they take him to visit an intentional community they have established in the Adirondacks, which they have populated with brainwashed volunteers and endowed with a constructed language and religion; faith in the latter is enforced by a synthetic gryphon-like monster, which murderously attacks the community unless proper averting rituals are undertaken.
In chapters 10 and 11, Joenes is recruited by the government and assigned to the "Octagon" (a larger replacement for the Pentagon). He gets lost in the vast building, as the map he had been given is wrong; while wandering, he encounters a military cartographer, who explains that all maps of the Octagon are deliberately corrupt in order to frustrate spies. This is followed by a lengthy monologue on the nature of secrets and truth, after which Joenes encounters a man named Theseus, who is hunting for a child-trafficking Octagon official named Edwin J. Minotaurus; Joenes eventually meets the latter, and is dispatched by him on an intelligence-gathering diplomatic mission to the Soviet Union.
Chapter twelve sees Jones in Moscow, where three Soviet dignitaries attempt to clarify the nature of a recent Sino-Soviet border incident which is not well understood in the West. Stripped of doublespeak and obfuscation, it turns out that the "border incident" was actually a full-scale conventional war between the USSR and China, which has been successfully covered up by both sides. The war had ranged back-and-forth across the entire territories of both powers, and had inflicted a death toll in the tens or even hundreds of millions, with the final result being an anticlimactic restoration of the status quo ante.
Chapters thirteen through fifteen relate how Joenes' returning plane is mistaken for an enemy missile over California and attacked by automated air-defense systems, sparking World War III. Joenes himself survives, and winds up in an underground command bunker, where he once again runs into Lum - who had accidentally enlisted in the Army while on a cocaine binge, but has since found a rewarding sinecure as a senior general's personal pimp. The duo escape from the bunker, steal a sailboat, and head for Polynesia.
The final chapter is ostensibly by the book's unnamed editor; it details Joenes' and Lum's life on Manituatu, where they slowly become revered figures and begin to set the pattern for the new civilization taking shape across the Pacific. In time, a schism develops between the two; both men teach similar ethical principles, but Lum additionally advocates for a militant de-industrialization of society ("Man, you ever try to build an atom bomb out of coral and coconut shells?") To that end, his "Lumist" followers carry out raids in which they violently confiscate any metal they come across in order to throw it into the sea. Lum himself is killed at an advanced age during a raid in Hawaii, by the irate owner of a sewing machine. The Lumists come to rule Fiji, where Lum's words are recorded as scripture.
Joenes' teachings are more subtle, and are only transmitted orally. They are mainly concerned with ethics and virtue, though it is said that towards the end of his life, Joenes became inclined toward maltheism, and spoke bitterly of the gods having created mankind as playthings for sadistic games. Decades later, a foreigner washes up on Manituatu; it turns out to be Watts, the thief, who has been seeking Joenes for decades in order to give him two items: a true map of the Octagon, and the message left by the vanished inmate of the Home for the Criminally Insane. Joenes reacts to the items with shock, and wordlessly departs for the forested mountains, never to be seen again.


## See also
Maurai (contemporary non-satirical series by Poul Anderson, also depicting a post-apocalyptic world dominated by Polynesians)


## References
^ isfdb Retrieved 2015-11-15.


URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Way_Station_(novel)
Content:

Way Station is a 1963 science fiction novel by American writer Clifford D. Simak, originally published as Here Gather the Stars in two parts in Galaxy Magazine in June and August 1963. Way Station won the 1964 Hugo Award for Best Novel.


## Plot summary
Born in 1840, Enoch Wallace is an American Civil War veteran who fought at the Battle of Gettysburg. He is recruited by an alien, whom Enoch names Ulysses (after Ulysses S. Grant), to operate a way station for interstellar travelers for Galactic Central. The equipment is installed in his house, while he lives in a small adjoining shed. His job is to monitor the machinery, including the regular and emergency "materializers", and make sure the biological needs of the wide variety of travelers are met. Enoch tries to communicate with them, with varying degrees of success, and befriends some of them.
He does not age while he is inside. His neighbors are aware of his longevity, but he keeps to his family farm, and they mind their own business. He has only a few friends, including old mailman Winslowe Smith and a woman in her early twenties, deaf-mute neighbor Lucy.
Almost a hundred years later, the US government becomes aware of him, and CIA agent Claude Lewis is sent to investigate. Lewis and his team secretly keep him under surveillance for two years. Enoch realizes he is being watched, but is not overly concerned.
One day, Lucy comes running to Enoch. She shows him her back; she has been whipped until she bled. When he sees her pursuers approaching, he takes her into the house on impulse, breaking his rule of letting no human inside. Hank Fisher (her white trash father) and her brother come. Lucy tried to stop her brother from training his new coon dog using a live animal, eventually paralyzing first the dog, then his master, with her mind. Her father then started whipping her, so she temporarily blinded him and ran away. When the men accuse Enoch of harboring her, he invites them to search. Hank tries to enter the house, but cannot, even with an axe. Enoch tells them to leave and never come back.
Ulysses shows up. Years before, an aged Vegan had died at the station, and in accordance with Vegan custom, Enoch had buried the body in the family plot. The authorities dug it up and took it away, upsetting the Vegans. Alien factions opposed to expansion in this direction seize upon the incident to force the tolerant Vegans to deliver an official protest to Enoch as representative of the Earth and have the station shut down. Ulysses gives Enoch the option of remaining on Earth (and aging normally) or manning another station.
Enoch tells Lewis it is vital that the body be returned. Lewis agrees. However, Ulysses does not believe it will change the decision.
Ulysses gives Enoch further bad news. Long ago, a mystic had created the Talisman, which enables people to make contact with the universal "spiritual force". It is unique, and with the death of the mystic, nobody has been able to create another. Very few possess the sensitivity or rapport to activate the device, perhaps one in many billions; the custodian took it from planet to planet for others to see and use. The Talisman was lost, misplaced or possibly stolen several years before. Despite the news being kept secret, Ulysses suspects the unusual unrest in the galaxy is somehow linked to its disappearance.
Enoch reveals that he has used the "Mizar system of statistics" to determine that war is looming on Earth. Ulysses informs him that there is a drastic, reliable method to stop it, but Enoch alone can apply for its use. It creates the mental inability to operate or understand machines for several generations before gradually wearing off. Enoch is undecided.
He starts packing his journals and alien artifacts he has been given by travelers, having decided to remain on Earth, but is interrupted when a "ratlike creature" emerges unannounced from the official materializer. The intruder takes out what looks like a gun, but Enoch grapples with it. The creature flees outside. Enoch chases after, and luckily his quarry runs into a dead end. The alien fires at him. Lucy and Ulysses arrive separately, and the latter tells Enoch that the intruder has the Talisman. Then they see Lucy struggling with the creature. Ulysses tells Enoch to shoot, and Enoch finally does, killing the alien. As Lucy comes to them with the Talisman, Ulysses joyfully tells Enoch that she is its new custodian, perhaps the best custodian in centuries. A mob, incited by Hank Fisher's lies, comes for Enoch, but Ulysses has Lucy use the Talisman to calm them down.
Afterward, Enoch "borrows" Lucy and the Talisman to attend a scheduled peace conference, before she leaves to take the Talisman around the galaxy. Ulysses states that Earth will become part of the galactic community because of her.


## Awards and nominations
Way Station won the 1964 Hugo Award for Best Novel.[1]
Way Station placed 27th in the 1966 Astounding/Analog All-Time Poll[2]
Way Station placed in a tie for 25th (with Rendezvous with Rama by Arthur C. Clarke) in the 1987 Locus All-Time Poll[3]
Way Station placed 31st in the 1998 Locus All-Time Poll[4]
Way Station placed 47th (in 20th century science fiction novel category) in the 2012 Locus All-Time Poll[1].


## Adaptations
In 2004, Revelstone Entertainment optioned the film rights to Way Station.[5] In September 2019, Netflix announced plans to produce and distribute a film based on the novel.[6]


## References
^ "Worlds Without End 1964 Hugo list". Retrieved April 28, 2011.
^ "The Locus Index to SF Awards: 1966 Astounding/Analog All-Time Poll". Archived from the original on August 27, 2014. Retrieved May 17, 2008.
^ "The Locus Index to SF Awards: 1987 Locus All-Time Poll". Archived from the original on February 4, 2010. Retrieved May 17, 2008.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown (link)
^ "The Locus Index to SF Awards: 1998 Locus All-Time Poll". Archived from the original on September 17, 2011. Retrieved May 17, 2008.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown (link)
^ Morfoot, Addie (December 4, 2004). "Revelstone goes to 'Way Station'". Variety. Retrieved May 17, 2008.
^ "MATT REEVES' 6TH & IDAHO LANDS SCI-FI CLASSIC WAY STATION FOR NETFLIX". Netflix Media Center. Retrieved September 14, 2019.


## External links
Way Station title listing at the Internet Speculative Fiction Database
Way Station at Open Library
Here Gather the Stars parts one and two on the Internet Archive
v
t
e
The Creator (1946)
Cosmic Engineers (1950)
Time and Again (1951)
City (1952)
Ring Around the Sun (1953)
Time is the Simplest Thing (1961)
Way Station (1963)
All Flesh is Grass (1965)
The Werewolf Principle (1967)
Why Call Them Back from Heaven? (1967)
The Goblin Reservation (1968)
Shakespeare's Planet (1976)
The Visitors (1980)
Project Pope (1981)
v
t
e
The Sword in the Stone by T. H. White (1939)
Slan by A. E. van Vogt (1941)
Beyond This Horizon by Anson MacDonald (1943)
Conjure Wife by Fritz Leiber (1944)
Shadow Over Mars by Leigh Brackett (1945)
The Mule by Isaac Asimov (1946)
Farmer in the Sky by Robert A. Heinlein (1951)
Fahrenheit 451 by Ray Bradbury (1954)
The Demolished Man by Alfred Bester (1953)
They'd Rather Be Right (aka: The Forever Machine) by Mark Clifton and Frank Riley (1955)
Double Star by Robert A. Heinlein (1956)
The Big Time by Fritz Leiber (1958)
A Case of Conscience by James Blish (1959)
Starship Troopers by Robert A. Heinlein (1960)
A Canticle for Leibowitz by Walter M. Miller, Jr. (1961)
Stranger in a Strange Land by Robert A. Heinlein (1962)
The Man in the High Castle by Philip K. Dick (1963)
Here Gather the Stars (aka: Way Station) by Clifford D. Simak (1964)
The Wanderer by Fritz Leiber (1965)
Dune by Frank Herbert / ...And Call Me Conrad (aka: This Immortal) by Roger Zelazny (1966)
The Moon Is a Harsh Mistress by Robert A. Heinlein (1967)
Lord of Light by Roger Zelazny (1968)
Stand on Zanzibar by John Brunner (1969)
The Left Hand of Darkness by Ursula K. Le Guin (1970)
Ringworld by Larry Niven (1971)
To Your Scattered Bodies Go by Philip José Farmer (1972)
The Gods Themselves by Isaac Asimov (1973)
Rendezvous with Rama by Arthur C. Clarke (1974)
The Dispossessed by Ursula K. Le Guin (1975)
The Forever War by Joe Haldeman (1976)
Where Late the Sweet Birds Sang by Kate Wilhelm (1977)
Gateway by Frederik Pohl (1978)
Dreamsnake by Vonda N. McIntyre (1979)
The Fountains of Paradise by Arthur C. Clarke (1980)
The Snow Queen by Joan D. Vinge (1981)
Downbelow Station by C. J. Cherryh (1982)
Foundation's Edge by Isaac Asimov (1983)
Startide Rising by David Brin (1984)
Neuromancer by William Gibson (1985)
Ender's Game by Orson Scott Card (1986)
Speaker for the Dead by Orson Scott Card (1987)
The Uplift War by David Brin (1988)
Cyteen by C. J. Cherryh (1989)
Hyperion by Dan Simmons (1990)
The Vor Game by Lois McMaster Bujold (1991)
Barrayar by Lois McMaster Bujold (1992)
A Fire Upon the Deep by Vernor Vinge / Doomsday Book by Connie Willis (1993)
Green Mars by Kim Stanley Robinson (1994)
Mirror Dance by Lois McMaster Bujold (1995)
The Diamond Age by Neal Stephenson (1996)
Blue Mars by Kim Stanley Robinson (1997)
Forever Peace by Joe Haldeman (1998)
To Say Nothing of the Dog by Connie Willis (1999)
A Deepness in the Sky by Vernor Vinge (2000)
Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire by J. K. Rowling (2001)
American Gods by Neil Gaiman (2002)
Hominids by Robert J. Sawyer (2003)
Paladin of Souls by Lois McMaster Bujold (2004)
Jonathan Strange & Mr Norrell by Susanna Clarke (2005)
Spin by Robert Charles Wilson (2006)
Rainbows End by Vernor Vinge (2007)
The Yiddish Policemen's Union by Michael Chabon (2008)
The Graveyard Book by Neil Gaiman (2009)
The Windup Girl by Paolo Bacigalupi / The City & the City by China Miéville (2010)
Blackout/All Clear by Connie Willis (2011)
Among Others by Jo Walton (2012)
Redshirts by John Scalzi (2013)
Ancillary Justice by Ann Leckie (2014)
The Three-Body Problem by Cixin Liu, translated by Ken Liu (2015)
The Fifth Season by N. K. Jemisin (2016)
The Obelisk Gate by N. K. Jemisin (2017)
The Stone Sky by N. K. Jemisin (2018)
The Calculating Stars by Mary Robinette Kowal (2019)
A Memory Called Empire by Arkady Martine (2020)
Network Effect by Martha Wells (2021)
A Desolation Called Peace by Arkady Martine (2022)
Nettle & Bone by T. Kingfisher (2023)
Some Desperate Glory by Emily Tesh (2024)
VIAF


URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cat%27s_Cradle
Content:

Cat's Cradle is a satirical postmodern novel, with science fiction elements, by American writer Kurt Vonnegut. Vonnegut's fourth novel, it was first published on March 18, 1963,[1] exploring and satirizing issues of science, technology, the purpose of religion, and the arms race, often through the use of morbid humor.


## Synopsis


### Background
The first-person everyman narrator opens the novel with "Call me Jonah. My parents did, or nearly did. They called me John", though neither name appears again throughout the novel. The narrator is a professional writer who frames the plot as a flashback set in the mid-20th century, when he was planning to write a book called The Day the World Ended. He describes his concept for that book as an account of what people were doing on the day of the atomic bombing of Hiroshima. Throughout, he also intersperses meaningful as well as sarcastic passages and sentiments from an odd religious scripture known as The Books of Bokonon. Most of the events of the novel occur before the narrator was converted to his current religion, Bokononism.


### Plot summary
While researching for his upcoming book, the narrator writes a letter to Newt Hoenikker, the younger son of the late Felix Hoenikker, a co-creator of the atomic bomb and Nobel laureate physicist, asking Newt to describe what he remembers about the day when the first bomb was dropped. Newt recounts that his father was doing nothing more than playing the string game "cat's cradle". About a year later, the narrator travels to (fictional) Ilium, New York to interview Felix Hoenikker's coworkers and other acquaintances. There, he learns of a substance called ice-nine, conceptualised for military use by Hoenikker and currently in possession of his three adult children. Ice-nine is an alternative structure of water that is solid at room temperature and acts as a seed crystal upon contact with ordinary liquid water, causing that liquid water to instantly freeze and transform into more ice-nine.
Eventually, a magazine assignment takes the narrator to the (fictional) Caribbean island of San Lorenzo, one of the poorest countries on Earth. On the plane ride, the narrator is surprised to meet Newt and Angela, Felix's only daughter. He also meets the newly appointed US ambassador to San Lorenzo, who provides a comprehensive guidebook on San Lorenzo's unusual culture and history. The guidebook describes a locally influential semi-parody religious movement called Bokononism, which combines irreverent, nihilistic, and cynical observations about life and God's will; an emphasis on coincidences and serendipity; and both thoughtful and humorous sayings and rituals into a holy text called The Books of Bokonon. Bokonon, the religion's founder, was a former leader of the island who created Bokononism as part of a utopian project to give people purpose and community in the face of the island's unsolvable poverty and squalor. As a deliberate attempt to give Bokononism an alluring sense of forbidden glamor and hope, the religion is nominally outlawed, which forced Bokonon to live in "hiding" in the jungle. The current dictator, "Papa" Monzano, threatens all Bokononists with impalement on a large hook. Intrigued by Bokononism, the narrator later discovers the strange reality that nearly all residents of San Lorenzo, even including "Papa" Monzano himself, practice it in secret, and punishment by the hook is, in actuality, quite rare.
On San Lorenzo, the plane passengers are greeted by "Papa" Monzano, his beautiful adopted daughter Mona (whom the narrator intensely lusts after), and a crowd of some five thousand San Lorenzans. Monzano is ill from cancer and wants his successor to be Frank Hoenikker: Monzano's personal bodyguard and, coincidentally, Felix Hoenikker's other son. Frank achieved this position by giving "Papa" Monzano a piece of ice-nine. However, Frank, uncomfortable with leading, confronts the narrator in private and somewhat randomly offers him the presidency. Startled at first, the narrator grudgingly accepts after he is promised the beautiful Mona for his bride. Newt reiterates the idea of the cat's cradle, implying that the game, with its invisible cat, is an appropriate symbol for the meaninglessness of life. Soon after, the bedridden "Papa" Monzano commits suicide by swallowing ice-nine, whereupon his corpse instantly turns into solid ice-nine. Frank Hoenikker admits to giving Monzano ice-nine, and the Hoenikkers explain that when they were young their father would give them hints about the existence of ice-nine while experimenting with it in the kitchen. After their father's death, they gathered chunks of the substance into thermos flasks and have kept them ever since.
Festivities for the narrator's presidential inauguration begin, but during an air show performed by San Lorenzo's fighter planes, one of the planes malfunctions and crashes into the seaside palace, causing Monzano's still-frozen body to fall into the sea. Instantly, all the water in the world's seas, rivers, and groundwater transforms into solid ice-nine. The freezing of the world's oceans immediately causes violent tornadoes to ravage the Earth, but the narrator manages to escape with Mona to a secret bunker beneath the palace. When the initial storms subside after several days, they emerge. Exploring the island for survivors, they discover a mass grave where all the surviving San Lorenzans committed suicide by touching ice-nine from the landscape to their mouths on the facetious advice of Bokonon, who has left a note of explanation. Displaying a mix of grief for her people and resigned amusement, Mona promptly follows suit and dies.
The horrified narrator is discovered by a few other survivors, including Newt and Frank Hoenikker, and he lives with them in a cave for several months, during which time he writes the contents of the book. Driving through the barren wasteland one day, he spots Bokonon himself, who is contemplating what the last words of The Books of Bokonon should be. Bokonon states that if he were younger, he would place a book about human stupidity on the peak of San Lorenzo's highest mountain, rest his head on it, swallow ice-nine, and die while thumbing his nose at God.


## Themes
Many of Vonnegut's recurring themes are prevalent in Cat's Cradle, most notably the issues of free will and man's relation to technology.[2] The former is embodied in the creation of Bokononism, an artificial religion created to make life bearable to the beleaguered inhabitants of San Lorenzo through acceptance and delight in the inevitability of everything that happens. The latter is demonstrated by the development and exploitation of ice-nine, which is conceived with indifference but is misused to disastrous ends. In his 1969 address to the American Physical Society, Vonnegut describes the inspiration behind ice-nine and its creator as the type of "old-fashioned scientist who isn't interested in people", and draws connections to nuclear weapons.[3]
More topically, Cat's Cradle takes the threat of nuclear destruction in the Cold War as a major theme. The Cuban Missile Crisis, in which world powers collided around a small Caribbean island, bringing the world to the brink of mutual assured destruction, occurred in 1962, and much of the novel can be seen as allegorical.[4]


## Style
Like most of Vonnegut's work, irony, morbid humor, and parody are used heavily throughout. Cat's Cradle, despite its relatively short length, contains 127 discrete chapters, some of which are verses from the Book of Bokonon. Vonnegut himself claimed that his books "are essentially mosaics made up of a whole bunch of tiny little chips... and each chip is a joke."[2]


## Background
After World War II, Kurt Vonnegut worked in the public relations department for General Electric research company. GE hired scientists and let them do pure research, and his job was to interview these scientists and find good stories about their research. Vonnegut felt that the older scientists were indifferent about the ways their discoveries might be used. When science fiction author H. G. Wells visited the labs in the 30s, the Nobel Prize-winning chemist Irving Langmuir suggested for him the idea of a story about a form of ice stable at room temperature. Wells never took it any further, but Vonnegut's older brother Bernard, who was Langmuir's junior colleague at GE, remembered and told him about it. After both the author and the scientist had died, Vonnegut thought to himself "Finders, keepers – the idea is mine".[5] Langmuir himself would become the model for Dr. Felix Hoenikker. Vonnegut said in an interview with The Nation that "Langmuir was absolutely indifferent to the uses that might be made of the truths he dug out of the rock and handed out to whoever was around, but any truth he found was beautiful in its own right, and he didn't give a damn who got it next."[6] Dr. Felix Hoenikker's fictional invention of ice-nine was similar in name only to the real substance Ice IX, one of a number of variant structures for ice. Langmuir had worked on seeding ice crystals to diminish or increase rain or storms.[7][8][9]


### Setting
The Republic of San Lorenzo is a fictional country where much of the book's second half takes place.
San Lorenzo is a tiny, rocky island nation located in the Caribbean Sea, positioned in the relative vicinity of Puerto Rico. San Lorenzo has only one city, its seaside capital of Bolivar. The country's form of government is a dictatorship, under the rule of ailing president "Papa" Monzano, who is a staunch ally of the United States and a fierce opponent of communism. No legislature exists. The infrastructure of San Lorenzo is described as being dilapidated, consisting of worn buildings, dirt roads, an impoverished populace, and having only one working automobile taxi in the entire country.
The language of San Lorenzo is a fictitious English-based creole language (for example "twinkle, twinkle, little star" is rendered "tsvent-kiul, tsvent-kiul, lett-pool store") that is referred to as "the San Lorenzan dialect". The San Lorenzan national anthem is based on the tune of Home on the Range. Its flag consists of a U.S. Marine Corps corporal's chevrons on a blue field (presumably the flag was updated, since in the 1920s Marine Corps rank insignia did not include crossed rifles). Its currency is named the corporal, at a rate of two corporals for every United States dollar; both the flag and the monetary unit are named after U.S. Marine Corporal Earl McCabe, who deserted his company while stationed at Port-au-Prince during the American occupation in 1922, and in transit to Miami, was shipwrecked on San Lorenzo. McCabe, along with accomplice Lionel Boyd Johnson from Tobago, together threw out the island's governing sugar company and, after a period of anarchy, proclaimed a republic.
San Lorenzo also has its own native religion, Bokononism, a religion based on enjoying life through believing "foma" (harmless lies), and taking encouragement where you can. Bokononism, founded by McCabe's accomplice Boyd Johnson (pronounced "Bokonon" in San Lorenzan dialect), however, is outlawed – an idea Bokonon himself conceived, because forbidding the religion would only make it spread quicker. Bokononists are liable to be punished by being impaled on a hook, but Bokononism privately remains the dominant religion of nearly everyone on the island, including the leaders who outlaw it. Officially, however, San Lorenzo is a Christian nation.


## Characters
The narrator is a writer who claims his parents named him John but begins the book by stating "Call me Jonah", alluding to the first line of Herman Melville's Moby-Dick ("Call me Ishmael"), offering a parallel between Moby-Dick and the Jonah's interaction with the large fish. Beyond the first page, neither name is mentioned again.[10] He describes the events in the book with humorous and sarcastic detail. While writing a book about the day of the atomic bombing of Hiroshima, he becomes involved with the Hoenikker children. Eventually, he is offered the presidency of San Lorenzo by Franklin Hoenikker.
Felix Hoenikker is the "Father of the Atom Bomb" and an unseen character who died many years before the novel's plot begins. Felix Hoenikker was proclaimed one of the smartest scientists on Earth. An eccentric and emotionless man, he is depicted as amoral and apathetic towards anything other than his research. He needed only something to keep him busy, such as in his role as one of the "Fathers of the Atomic Bomb", and in his creation of "ice-nine", a potentially catastrophic substance with the capability to destroy all life on Earth, but which he saw merely as a mental puzzle (a Marine general suggested developing a substance that could solidify mud so that soldiers could run across it more easily). During experiments with "ice nine", Felix took a nap in his rocking chair and died. The narrator's quest for biographical details about Hoenikker provides both the background and the connecting thread between the various subsections of the story.
Emily Hoenikker was the wife of Felix, and mother to Frank, Angela, and Newt. She died in childbirth with the latter. According to Dr. Asa Breed, a former lover of Emily's, the complications at Newt's birth were the result of a pelvic injury she sustained in a car accident some time before.
Dr. Asa Breed is Felix Hoenikker's former supervisor. He takes the narrator around Illium and to the General Forge and Foundry Company where the late Felix worked. Later in the tour, Dr. Breed becomes upset with the narrator for misrepresenting scientists.[11]
Marvin Breed is Asa Breed's brother. He owned and operated the tombstone shop in the city where Felix Hoenikker worked on the atomic bomb. Here, the narrator is shocked to find a tombstone with his own last name on it.
Newton "Newt" Hoenikker: The dwarf ("midget") son of famed scientist Felix Hoenikker, and a painter. He is the brother of both Frank and Angela Hoenikker. His main hobby is painting minimalist abstract works. He briefly had an affair with a Ukrainian dwarf dancer named Zinka, who turned out to be a KGB agent sent to steal ice-nine for the Soviet Union.
Franklin "Frank" Hoenikker is Felix Hoenikker's older son, and a Major General in San Lorenzo. He is the brother of Newt and Angela Hoenikker. He is an utterly technically minded person who is unable to make decisions except for giving technical advice. His main hobby is building models. Expected to take over for "Papa" Monzano after his death, he anxiously hands the presidency over to the narrator instead.
Angela Hoenikker Conners is Felix Hoenikker's daughter and a clarinetist. She is the married sister of Frank and Newt Hoenikker. In contrast to her dwarf brother, Angela is unusually tall for a woman. She used to take care of her father after her mother's death and acts as a mother figure to Newt. She and her brothers all have samples of ice-nine, which they found along with their father's body, dead in his chair. It is implied that she used ice-nine to bargain a marriage with her husband. She dies when she blows on a clarinet contaminated with ice-nine after the apocalyptic event at the end of the novel.
Bokonon (birth name Lionel Boyd Johnson) co-founded San Lorenzo as a republic, along with Earl McCabe (a now-dead US Marine deserter), and created the religion of Bokononism, which he asked McCabe to outlaw in order to give it an alluringly forbidden sense of mystery, giving some meaning to the miserable lives of San Lorenzo's extremely impoverished citizens. He therefore has lived for years in exile somewhere in San Lorenzo's jungles. He only appears once in the novel in person: in the very final chapter.
"Papa" Monzano is the ailing dictator of San Lorenzo. He was once Earl McCabe's right-hand man and chosen successor. He appoints Frank Hoenikker as his own successor, and then commits suicide with a piece of ice-nine. He is the adopted father of Mona Monzano.
Mona Aamons Monzano is the 18-year-old adopted daughter of "Papa" Monzano. A gorgeous black girl with blond hair due to her Finnish biological father, her adoption was a political ploy to integrate different races under Monzano's rule and provide a beloved poster child for his regime. The narrator describes her as "the only beautiful woman on San Lorenzo". She is expected to marry Monzano's successor, and she therefore agrees to marry the narrator before the disaster at the end of the novel.
Julian Castle is the multi-millionaire ex-owner of Castle Sugar Cooperation, whom the narrator travels to San Lorenzo to interview for a magazine. He eventually changed his outlook in life, abandoning his business ventures to set up and operate a humanitarian hospital in the jungle of San Lorenzo.
H. Lowe Crosby is a fervently pro-American bicycle manufacturer the narrator meets on his plane ride to San Lorenzo. His main goal is to move his American factory to San Lorenzo, so he can run it with cheap labor.
Hazel Crosby is married to H. Lowe Crosby, a Hoosier who believes in some cosmic fraternity among Hoosiers and asks all Hoosiers she meets around the globe to call her "Mom".
Philip Castle is the son of Julian Castle, and the operator of a hotel on San Lorenzo. He also wrote a history of San Lorenzo that the narrator reads on his flight to the island. Bokonon taught both him and Mona when they were young students. Through reading the index of Castle's book, Claire Minton deduces that he's a homosexual.
Horlick Minton is the new American ambassador to San Lorenzo, whom the narrator meets on his plane ride. He was blacklisted as a Communist sympathizer during the McCarthy era.
Claire Minton is a writer of book indexes. She is so well versed at indexing that she even claims to be able to deduce strange knowledge about writers based on reading their indexes. She is married to the new American ambassador to San Lorenzo. She and her husband are extremely close, forming what the narrator calls a duprass.


## Bokononism
The semi-humorous religion secretly practiced by the people of San Lorenzo, and called Bokononism, encompasses concepts unique to the novel. Many of these concepts use words from the San Lorenzan creole "dialect" of English. Assumed within the religion is the presence of God, who evidently works in mysterious ways. Many of its sacred texts, collectively called The Books of Bokonon, are written in the form of calypso songs.[12] Bokononist rituals are equally strange or absurdist; for example, the supreme religious act consists of any two worshippers rubbing the bare soles of their feet together to inspire spiritual connection.
Bokononist terms include:[12]
karass – A group of people linked in a cosmically significant manner, even when superficial linkages are not evident.
duprass – a karass of only two people, who almost always die within a week of each other. The typical example is a loving couple who work together for a great purpose.
granfalloon – a false karass; i.e., a group of people who imagine they have a connection that does not really exist. An example is "Hoosiers." Hoosiers are people from Indiana, and Hoosiers have no true spiritual destiny in common. They really share little more than a name.
wampeter – the central theme or purpose of a karass. Each karass has two wampeters at any given time, one waxing and one waning.
foma – harmless untruths
wrang-wrang – Someone who steers a Bokononist away from their line of perception. For example, the narrator of the book is steered away from Nihilism when his Nihilist house sitter kills his cat and leaves his apartment in disrepair.
kan-kan – An object or item that brings a person into their karass. The narrator states in the book that his kan-kan was the book he wrote about the Hiroshima bombing.
sinookas – The intertwining "tendrils" of peoples' lives.
vin-dit – a sudden shove in the direction of Bokononism
saroon – to acquiesce to a vin-dit
stuppa – a fogbound child (i.e. an idiot)
duffle – the destiny of thousands of people placed on one "stuppa"
sin-wat – a person who wants all of somebody's love for themself
pool-pah – shit storm, but in some contexts: wrath of God
Busy, busy, busy – words Bokononists whisper when they think about how complicated and unpredictable the machinery of life really is
Now I will destroy the whole world – last words of a Bokononist before taking their own life
boko-maru – the supreme act of worship of the Bokononists, which is an intimate act consisting of prolonged physical contact between the naked soles of the feet of two persons
zah-mah-ki-bo – Inevitable destiny
Borasisi and Pabu, the Sun god and lunar goddess; the binary trans-Neptunian object 66652 Borasisi and its moon, 66652 Borasisi I Pabu, now bear their names.† Borasisi, the Sun, held Pabu, the Moon, in his arms and hoped that Pabu would bear him a fiery child. But poor Pabu gave birth to children that were cold, that did not burn...Then poor Pabu herself was cast away, and she went to live with her favorite child, which was Earth.[13]
Borasisi, the Sun, held Pabu, the Moon, in his arms and hoped that Pabu would bear him a fiery child. But poor Pabu gave birth to children that were cold, that did not burn...Then poor Pabu herself was cast away, and she went to live with her favorite child, which was Earth.[13]


## Reception
After The Sirens of Titan (1959) and Mother Night (1962) received favorable reviews and sold well in paperback, large publisher Holt, Rinehart, and Winston issued Cat's Cradle as a hardcover original.[14] Theodore Sturgeon praised Cat's Cradle, describing its storyline as "appalling, hilarious, shocking, and infuriating", and concluded that "this is an annoying book and you must read it. And you better take it lightly, because if you don't you'll go off weeping and shoot yourself".[15]
According to Indianapolis Monthly, "In 1972, the school board in Strongsville, Ohio, banned the book without stating an official reason. Notes from the meeting include references to the book as "completely sick" and "garbage". The ban was overturned in 1976."[16] Additionally, the book was also challenged in 1982 at New Hampshire's Merrimack High School.[17]
Cat's Cradle was nominated for a Hugo Award for Best Novel in 1964.


## Film, television, and theatrical adaptations
A theatrical adaptation (1976) by Bruce Pribram and Ken Kuta was presented and toured by Theatre Express, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania.[18]
In 2005, the book was optioned by Leonardo DiCaprio's production company, Appian Way Productions. James V. Hart, screenwriter for the film Contact (1997), and his son Jake Hart were linked to the developing script.[19][20]
A calypso musical adaptation was presented by the Untitled Theater Company #61 in New York in 2008.[21]
Noah Hawley has been set to direct a TV adaptation.[22]


## In popular culture
The 1964 British science fiction TV series Stingray broadcast an early dramatization of a scenario inspired by ' Cat’s Cradle. In the apocalyptic episode “Pink Ice,” the world’s oceans are being frozen by an ice-nine-like substance distributed via seeder mines.
Jack Lancaster fronted a band in the early 1970s named Karass which included Chick Web, Percy Jones, John Goodsall and Robin Lumley.[23]
A modified version of Bokonon's poem "Nice, Nice, Very Nice" ("53rd Calypso") from the novel was also set to music by the soft rock band Ambrosia, with Vonnegut receiving co-writing credit, and featured as the opening track on their 1975 debut album. Vonnegut wrote to the band after hearing the song on the radio: "I myself am crazy about our song, of course, but what do I know and why wouldn't I be? This much I have always known, anyway: Music is the only art that's really worth a damn. I envy you guys."[24]
The Grateful Dead's publishing company, Ice Nine, was named after the fictional substance. Between 1983 and 1985, the band's leader Jerry Garcia worked with the scriptwriter and comedian Tom Davis on a screenplay based on the book. The film was never produced.[25]
Vonnegut collaborated with American composer Dave Soldier for a 2001 CD titled Ice-9 Ballads, featuring nine songs with lyrics taken from Cat's Cradle. Vonnegut narrated his lyrics to Soldier's music.[26]
The plot of The Recruit (2003) involves a fictional computer virus named "ICE-9".
The Born Ruffians 2008 album Red, Yellow & Blue includes a track called "Kurt Vonnegut" featuring the line from Cat's Cradle: "Tiger got to hunt bird got to fly Man got to sit and wonder why, why, why Tiger got to sleep bird got to land Man got to tell himself he understand".[27]
The heavy metal band Ice Nine Kills was originally named "Ice Nine" and added "Kills" before the release of their first EP.


## References
^ "New Books Received". Hartford Courant. February 27, 1963. p. 21 – via Newspapers.com.
^ a b Grossman, Edward. "Vonnegut & His Audience." Commentary (July 1974): 40–46. Rpt. in Contemporary Literary Criticism. Ed. Carolyn Riley and Phyllis Carmel Mendelson. Vol. 5. Detroit: Gale, 1976.
^ Vonnegut, Kurt. Wampeters, Foma & Granfalloons. Dial Press. p. 98.
^ "Cold War Literature." Twentieth-Century Literary Criticism. Ed. Thomas J. Schoenberg and Lawrence J. Trudeau. Vol. 186. Detroit: Gale, 2007.
^ Ball, Philip. "The chemistry that inspired H.G. Wells". Chemistryworld.com. Retrieved December 14, 2021.
^ Musil, Robert K. (August 2, 1980). "There Must Be More to Love Than Death: A Conversation With Kurt Vonnegut". The Nation. 231 (4): 128–132. ISSN 0027-8378.
^ Wolfgang Saxon (April 27, 1997). "Bernard Vonnegut, 82, Physicist Who Coaxed Rain From the Sky". NY Times.
^ Jeff Glorfeld (June 9, 2019). "The genius who ended up in a Vonnegut novel". Cosmos. Archived from the original on October 23, 2020. Retrieved October 19, 2020.
^ Sam Kean (September 5, 2017). "The Chemist Who Thought He Could Harness Hurricanes. Irving Langmuir's ill-fated attempts at seeding storms showed just how difficult it is to control the weather". The Atlantic.
^ "Study Guide to Chapters 66-96 of *Cat's Cradle*". www.k-state.edu. Retrieved December 13, 2023.
^ Vonnegut, 40
^ a b Hart, James D.; Leininger, Phillip (October 12, 1995). "Cat's Cradle". The Oxford Companion to American Literature (Sixth ed.). New York. ISBN 0195065484. OCLC 31754197.{{cite book}}: CS1 maint: location missing publisher (link)
^ "The Books of Bokonon". www.cs.uni.edu. Retrieved December 13, 2023.
^ Latham, Rob (2009). "Fiction, 1950-1963". In Bould, Mark; Butler, Andrew M.; Roberts, Adam; Vint, Sherryl (eds.). The Routledge Companion to Science Fiction. Routledge. pp. 80–89. ISBN 9781135228361.
^ Sturgeon, Theodore (August 1963). "Galaxy's 5 Star Shelf". Galaxy Science Fiction. pp. 180–182.
^ "Taboo Titles". Indianapolis Monthly. September 28, 2015. Retrieved October 6, 2018.
^ "Cat's Cradle by Kurt Vonnegut". Banned Library. April 16, 2017. Retrieved October 6, 2018.
^ Vonnegut, Kurt Jr. (1972). Between Time and Timbuktu or Prometheus-5. Script by David O'Dell. Delta Books.
^ "NAMES & FACES". The Washington Post. July 10, 2005. pp. D03. Retrieved May 17, 2008.
^ Sahagian, Jacqueline (May 11, 2015). "TV Takes a Crack at Unfilmable Vonnegut Novel". Showbiz Cheat Sheet.
^ "Cat's Cradle, a calypso musical based on the book by Kurt Vonnegut". Untitledtheater.com. Archived from the original on March 10, 2009. Retrieved May 17, 2008.
^ Cat's Cradle (Aventure, Comédie, Drame), 26 Keys Productions, FX Productions, IM Global Television, retrieved March 25, 2025
^ "Interview with Jack Lancaster". DME. November 2009. Archived from the original on September 6, 2014. Retrieved August 15, 2014.
^ "Track of the Day: 'Nice, Nice, Very Nice' by Ambrosia". The Atlantic. September 9, 2016. Retrieved September 15, 2020.
^ "Grateful Dead Publishing Company Inks with Warner Chappell". Digitalmusicnews.com. January 17, 2020. Retrieved December 14, 2021.
^ "Mulatta Records". Mulatta.org. Archived from the original on January 21, 2013. Retrieved December 14, 2021.
^ "Five songs inspired by Kurt Vonnegut". faroutmagazine.co.uk. April 11, 2022. Retrieved December 13, 2023.


## Further reading
Oltean, A. A. (2013). "An Application of the General Theory of Verbal Humor to Kurt Vonnegut's 'Cat's Cradle'". Studii De Ştiintă Şi Cultură, 9(1), 143–149.


## External links
Vonnegut, Kurt Cat's Cradle Holt, Rinehart and Winston, 1963 at Internet Archive
Bokononism All text from Cat's Cradle that refers to Bokononism (including the Books of Bokonon)
The Books of Bokonon online
Wechner, Bernd (2004). "Bokononism". bernd.wechner.info. Archived from the original on October 1, 2005. All of the text from Cat's Cradle which refers to Bokononism (including the Books of Bokonon)
Wallingford, Eugene (2010). "The Books of Bokonon". Cs.uni.edu. All of the text from Cat's Cradle which refers to Bokononism (including the Books of Bokonon).
v
t
e
Player Piano (1952)
The Sirens of Titan (1959)
Mother Night (1961)
Cat's Cradle (1963)
God Bless You, Mr. Rosewater (1965)
Slaughterhouse-Five (1969)
Breakfast of Champions (1973)
Slapstick (1976)
Jailbird (1979)
Deadeye Dick (1982)
Galápagos (1985)
Bluebeard (1987)
Hocus Pocus (1990)
Timequake (1997)
God Bless You, Dr. Kevorkian (1999)
We Are What We Pretend to Be: The First and Last Works (2013)
Canary in a Cat House (1961)
Welcome to the Monkey House (1968)
Bagombo Snuff Box (1999)
Armageddon in Retrospect (2008)
Look at the Birdie (2009)
While Mortals Sleep (2011)
Sucker's Portfolio (2013)
Complete Stories (2017)
Wampeters, Foma and Granfalloons (1974)
Palm Sunday (1981)
Fates Worse Than Death (1991)
A Man Without a Country (2005)
Armageddon in Retrospect (2008)
Kurt Vonnegut: Letters (2012)
If This Isn't Nice, What Is?: Advice to the Young (2013)
Vonnegut by the Dozen (2013)
Fortitude (1968)
Happy Birthday, Wanda June (1970)
Between Time and Timbuktu (1972)
Like Shaking Hands with God (1999)
Happy Birthday, Wanda June (1971)
Slaughterhouse-Five (1972)
Between Time and Timbuktu (1972)
Next Door (1975)
Kurt Vonnegut's God Bless You, Mr. Rosewater (1979)
Slapstick of Another Kind (1982)
Who Am I This Time? (1982)
Displaced Person (1985)
Kurt Vonnegut's Monkey House (1991)
Harrison Bergeron (1995)
Mother Night (1996)
Breakfast of Champions (1999)
2081 (2009)
2BR02B: To Be or Naught to Be (2016)
Kilgore Trout
Eliot Rosewater
Rabo Karabekian
RAMJAC
Ilium
Granfalloon
Tralfamadore
Ice-nine
Kurt Vonnegut Museum and Library
Vonnegut (Mercury crater)
Jill Krementz (second wife)
Mark Vonnegut (son)
Edith Vonnegut (daughter)
Kurt Vonnegut Sr. (father)
Bernard Vonnegut (brother)
Bernard Vonnegut Sr. (grandfather)
Clemens Vonnegut (great-grandfather)
VIAF
Germany
United States
Israel
IdRef


URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Greybeard
Content:
Greybeard is a science fiction novel by British author Brian Aldiss, published in 1964.


## Plot summary
Set decades after the Earth's population has been sterilised as a result of nuclear bomb tests conducted in Earth's orbit, the book shows a world emptying of humans, with only an ageing, childless population left. The story is mainly told through the eyes of Algernon "Algy" Timberlane (the titular Greybeard) and his wife, Martha.[1]


## Publishing history
Since its first publication by Faber & Faber and Harcourt, Brace and World in 1964, it has had numerous reprints and translations, including Romanian, Norwegian, Japanese, Dutch, Swedish, Slovenian, Polish, Hungarian, Portuguese, Czech, Danish, Spanish, German and French.[2] It was included in the Gollancz science fiction reprint series, SF Masterworks.[3]


## Reception
The book is included in Interzone editor David Pringle's Science Fiction: The 100 Best Novels (1985).[4]


## References
Greybeard, Brian Aldiss. New York: Signet/New American Library, 1965. p. 2689
^ "Omphalos' Book Reviews: Omphalos' SF Book Reviews". Omphalosbookreviews.com. Archived from the original on March 21, 2015. Retrieved 2017-01-02.
^ Aldiss, Brian W. Formats and Editions of Greybeard. OCLC 1222334.
^ https://brianaldiss.co.uk/ [bare URL]
^ Pringle, David (30 June 2014). Science Fiction: The 100 Best Novels. Orion. ISBN 9781473208070.


## External links
Greybeard at Brian Aldiss website
Greybeard title listing at the Internet Speculative Fiction Database
Greybeard at fantasticfiction website
review at "My Science Fiction Life", BBC Four website
Aldiss video commentary on Greybeard at Meet the Author website

This article about a speculative fiction novel of the 1960s is a stub. You can help Wikipedia by expanding it.
See guidelines for writing about novels. Further suggestions might be found on the article's talk page.
v
t
e


URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nova_Express
Content:

Nova Express is a 1964 novel by American author William S. Burroughs. It was written using the 'fold-in' method, a version of the cut-up method, developed by Burroughs with Brion Gysin, of enfolding snippets of different texts into the novel. It is part of The Nova Trilogy, or "Cut-Up Trilogy', together with The Soft Machine and The Ticket That Exploded. Burroughs considered the trilogy a "sequel" or "mathematical" continuation of Naked Lunch.
Nova Express was nominated for the Nebula Award for Best Novel in 1965. It is listed in David Pringle's 1985 book Science Fiction: The 100 Best Novels.
In 2014, Grove Press published a "Restored Text" edition, edited by Oliver Harris, which included a number of corrections and added an introduction and extensive notes. The introduction argued for the care with which Burroughs used his methods and established the text's complex manuscript histories.


## Interpretation
Nova Express is a social commentary on human and machine control of life. The Nova Mob—Sammy the Butcher, Green Tony, Iron Claws, The Brown Artist, Jacky Blue Note, Limestone John, Izzy the Push, Hamburger Mary, Paddy The Sting, The Subliminal Kid, Blue Dinosaur, Mr. and Mrs. D —are viruses, "defined as the three-dimensional coordinate point of a controller"[2] ... "which invade the human body and in the process produce language."[3] These Nova Criminals represent society, culture, and government, and have taken control by the use of word and image. Inspector Lee and the rest of the Nova Police are left fighting for the rest of humanity in the power struggle. "The Nova Police can be compared to apomorphine, a regulating instance that need not continue and has no intention of continuing after its work is done."[4] The police are focused on "first-order addictions of junkies, homosexuals, dissidents, and criminals; if these criminals vanish, the police must create more in order to justify their own survival."[5] The Nova Police depend upon the Nova Criminals for existence; if the criminals cease to exist, so do the police. "They act like apomorphine, the nonaddictive cure for morphine addiction that Burroughs used and then promoted for many years."[6]
Control is the main theme of the novel, and Burroughs attempts to use language to break down the walls of culture, the biggest control machine. He uses Inspector Lee to express his own thoughts about the world. "The purpose of my writing is to expose and arrest Nova Criminals. In Naked Lunch, Soft Machine and Nova Express I show who they are and what they are doing and what they will do if they are not arrested. [...] With your help we can occupy The Reality Studio and retake their universe of Fear Death and Monopoly."[7] As Burroughs battles with the self, what is human, and what is "reality", he finds that language is the only way to maintain dominance over the "powerful instruments of control", which are the most prevalent enemies of human society.


## Reception
While Naked Lunch was an initial shock to the literary community, Nova Express was considered the end of Burroughs's stylistic experiment and of the Nova Trilogy. The novel received more praise on its own, as it was often compared to the other books in the trilogy and Naked Lunch. Eric Mottram stated that although "Burroughs's repetitive narcotic and homoerotic fantasies become tedious in sections of his third novel ... it is from these obsessions that his most powerful work develops."[8]
Reviewing the novel for a genre audience, Judith Merril compared Nova Express to "the surreality of certain dreams, or the intense fascination of a confusion of new impressions in real life."[9]


## References
^ Elliott, George P. (November 8, 1964). "Speaking of Books: Nihilism". The New York Times: BR2. With the novel 'Nova Express,' published tomorrow...
^ Burroughs, William S. Nova Express. New York: Grove, 1992. p. 68
^ Murphy, Timothy S. Wising Up the Marks: The Amodern William Burroughs. New York: University of California, 1998. p. 110
^ Burroughs. Nova Express. p. 51
^ Murphy. p. 131
^ Murphy, ibid
^ Burroughs. Nova Express. p. 14
^ Hibbard, Allen, ed. Conversations with William S. Burroughs. Jackson: University of Mississippi, 1999. p. 12
^ "Books", F&SF, May 1965, p.74
v
t
e
And the Hippos Were Boiled in Their Tanks
Junkie
Queer
Naked Lunch
The Soft Machine
The Ticket That Exploded
Dead Fingers Talk
Nova Express
The Last Words of Dutch Schultz
The Wild Boys
Port of Saints
Blade Runner (a movie)
Cities of the Red Night
Ghost of Chance
The Place of Dead Roads
The Western Lands
My Education: A Book of Dreams
The Cat Inside
Interzone
Exterminator!
Ah Pook Is Here
Tornado Alley
The Third Mind
Time (book)
The Electronic Revolution
The Third Mind
Ali's Smile: Naked Scientology
The Adding Machine: Collected Essays
The Yage Letters
The Job: Interviews with William S. Burroughs
Last Words: The Final Journals of William S. Burroughs
Call Me Burroughs
Dead City Radio
You're the Guy I Want to Share My Money With
Spare Ass Annie and Other Tales
The "Priest" They Called Him
Seven Souls
Tony Trischka
Beat Generation
Beat Hotel
Cut-up technique
Burroughs (film)
The Black Rider
The Junky's Christmas
The Valley
Naked Lunch (film)
Beat
Words of Advice: William S. Burroughs on the Road
Corso: The Last Beat
William S. Burroughs: A Man Within
Kill Your Darlings
Queer (film)
23 enigma
Joan Vollmer (wife)
William S. Burroughs Jr. (son)
William Seward Burroughs I (grandfather)
Lucien Carr
James Grauerholz
Allen Ginsberg
Brion Gysin


URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Martian_Time-Slip
Content:

Martian Time-Slip is a 1964 science fiction novel by American writer Philip K. Dick, set in a colony on Mars, with themes of mental illness, the physics of time, and the dangers of centralized authority.
The novel was first published under the title All We Marsmen, serialized in the August, October and December 1963 issues of Worlds of Tomorrow magazine. The subsequent 1964 publication as Martian Time-Slip is virtually identical, with different chapter breaks.[1]


## Plot summary
Jack Bohlen is a repairman who emigrated to Mars to flee from his bouts of schizophrenia. He lives with a wife and a young son, and lives on the frontier edge of one of the settlements. Mars is a struggling colony, where conflicts from the overpopulated Earth (largely based in Cold War-era relationships) are loosely projected onto the planet. In order to encourage investment and migration from Earth, however, the colony's biggest problems are kept secret. One of these problems is that space travel causes genetic mutations and "abnormal births."
Bohlen has a chance encounter with Arnie Kott, the hard-nosed leader of the Water Workers' Union, when both Bohlen's and Kott's 'copters are called to assist a group of critically dehydrated Bleekmen, the original inhabitants of Mars who are thought to be genetically similar to the Khoekhoe of Earth. Bohlen rebukes Kott for his hesitance to help the Bleekmen, an act that angers Kott. For his help, the Bleekmen give Bohlen a sacred "water witch" that they say will protect him.
After visiting with his ex-wife, Anne Esterhazy, about their own "anomalous" child, Kott hears of the theories of Dr. Milton Glaub, a psychotherapist at Camp Ben-Gurion, an institution for those afflicted with pervasive developmental disorders. Glaub believes that mental illnesses may be altered states of time perception. Kott becomes interested in Manfred Steiner, an autistic boy at Camp B-G in the hopes that the boy can predict the future—a skill Kott would find useful to his business ventures. Manfred's father, Norbert Steiner, was a popular importer of contraband luxury items who just committed suicide. Kott then makes a move to take over the business, unbeknownst to Norbert's assistant, Otto Zitte.
Kott then asks Dr. Glaub to lend him Manfred (now fatherless) so that he can build a machine that will slow down his interactions with people and allow Manfred to communicate with them (and thus, for Kott to also know the future). For this task, Kott leases (and eventually buys out) Bohlen's contract from his current employer so that he can work on building the device full-time. Bohlen takes a liking to Manfred but the assignment stresses him out because he fears that contact with the mentally ill may cause him to relapse. Bohlen also begins an affair with Kott's mistress, Doreen Anderton.
The narrative turns to the perspective of Manfred, who is afraid of a future only he can see, in which he is a decrepit old man, confined to a bed on life-support, living in a derelict medical compound called AM-WEB, a dumping ground for forgotten people like him. We later learn that he is obsessed with this vision and thus cannot focus on the present.
Meanwhile, Bohlen's father, Leo—a wealthy land speculator from Earth—arrives to stake a claim to the seemingly worthless Franklin D. Roosevelt mountain range after receiving an insider tip that the United Nations plans to build a huge apartment complex there. Kott learns that a speculator with a fake name has arrived and becomes obsessed with figuring out where they are buying land so that he can buy it first (Manfred's prognostications become the main mechanism for this task).
On the trip out to the range with his father, Bohlen brings along Manfred, who draws a picture while they stake their claim to the land. The drawing shows the forthcoming apartment complexes, but in a dilapidated state, far in the future. Bohlen realizes that Manfred can indeed predict the future and connects the name "AM-WEB" on the building to how co-op apartment complexes are named on Earth.[2]
On an earlier repair assignment, Bohlen was sent to service the simulacra at the Public School, where lessons are taught by robotic simulations of historical figures. These figures are deeply disturbing to Bohlen as they remind him of his own schizoid episodes where he perceived people around him as non-living robots. When he takes Manfred to the school during an assignment, the simulacra begin acting strangely, as it seems Manfred is altering their functionality. Bohlen is asked to take Manfred away, but then has a psychotic break, seeing the world from Manfred's perspective and subsequently suffering a debilitating panic attack. Dr. Glaub arrives to escort them both out and warns Bohlen to avoid Manfred because he will cause him to revert into permanent psychosis.
The narrative then turns to the crux of the story—a meeting between Kott, Bohlen and Kott's mistress, Doreen, at Kott's home, with Manfred in tow. Bohlen shows Kott the future drawing by Manfred and explains that his father was the speculator from Earth, who has already registered his purchase of the entire FDR Range. Until this meeting, he had no idea what Kott was up to, and he apologizes for the misunderstanding. The episode is actually previewed three times, in successive chapters, from each character's perspective (though partly through Manfred's eyes—and possibly Bohlen's), before it actually occurs in the narrative's real timeline. In each repetition, however, the events are more surreal and the perceptions more hallucinatory. When the events of the story finally reach the crucial point where Bohlen explains the bad news (something he intensely fears after having foreseen a deadly outcome), he himself does not experience it (or at least, he cannot remember it later). Bohlen's awareness stops as he and Doreen arrive at Kott's home and picks up after they leave. He only knows that he and Kott parted ways, superficially friends (with Kott forgiving him) but actually enemies.
During the repetition of this episode, it becomes clear that Heliogabalus, Kott's Bleekman servant, is easily able to communicate with Manfred (mostly through telepathy). Heliogabalus explains that, from Manfred's point of view, (Earth) humans are strange beings who live in a world of fractured time where they disappear from one place and reappear in another and otherwise move in a jerky, uncoordinated manner. Heliogabalus, to Manfred, moves smoothly and gracefully (we later learn that all Bleekmen are like this to Manfred).
Pressured by Kott, Heliogabalus reveals that the Bleekmen's sacred rock, "Dirty Knobby", could possibly be used as a time travel portal that Manfred may be able to open. Kott centers his interest in altering the past on two goals: revenge on Bohlen and claiming the FDR mountains before his father, Leo, does. Heliogabalus warns Kott that it would be dangerous to attack Bohlen because he possesses a "water-witch". (Interestingly, in the latter half of the story, Dr. Glaub increasingly attempts to intervene on Bohlen's behalf, and it is unclear if this is something to do with the water-witch, Manfred's manipulation of time, or if Dr. Glaub is descending into his own psychotic break). Heliogabalus also explains that Manfred will only help him if Kott promises to send him back to Earth, changing the future so he never ends up in the horrifying AM-WEB building.
Kott takes Manfred on the pilgrimage to "Dirty Knobby" and is transported back in time, to the point where he first appeared in the novel (emerging from a sybaritic bath-house run by the Union). He soon finds himself repeating the actions that led him to meet Bohlen while simultaneously dealing with perceptual distortions (essentially Manfred's cold, dark perception of reality). He is unable to get to the FDR mountains to plant his stake, being compelled by law to go to the aid of the dehydrated Bleekmen, just as he did before. There he again encounters Bohlen, as he did originally, but in attempting to shoot him, Kott is first struck by a Bleekman's poisoned arrow. In his pain and anguish, he wishes only to return to his original timeline and vows to give up his revenge.
Kott awakens back at Dirty Knobby and realizes he has failed to change the past. Thankful to be back home, he decides to give up on his schemes, abandon Doreen, and let Bohlen get on with his life. He still desires to help Manfred, but Manfred has wandered off during the purported "time-travel" episode (i.e., nothing that Kott did in the "past" appears to affect the current timeline).
Leaving Dirty Knobby, Kott waves to a 'copter overhead, thinking it is Bohlen and Doreen. Instead it is Otto Zitte, whose business he had earlier bombed. After the suicide of Norbert Steiner, Kott, his best customer, elected to take over Norbert's contraband business. Zitte, Norbert's assistant, beat him to the punch, so Kott's men destroyed the smuggler's storage facility and the adjacent property, leaving a message that "Arnie Kott doesn't like what you stand for". Zitte then shoots Kott, who believes he is in another of Manfred's distorted realities. Bohlen and Doreen land in Kott's own 'copter and take Kott back to Lewistown. Kott dies en route, believing to the last that he was only experiencing another hallucination. Meanwhile, Manfred has fallen in with a group of Bleekmen leaving the FDR Mountains in the wake of the UN's commencing construction.
Bohlen returns to his wife, Silvia, who had been seduced by Zitte on his sales round. Despite both admitting to infidelity (Jack with Doreen and Silvia with Zitte), they decide to maintain their marriage. Next door at the Steiner's, there is a disturbance, and Norbert's widow runs screaming into the night. Barging in, Bohlen and Silvia see a decrepit old man in a wheelchair, festooned with tubes, accompanied by Bleekmen. Bohlen realizes it is the future Manfred. He had saved himself from AM-WEB and has now come back through time to see his family and thank Bohlen.
In a subdued final scene, Bohlen and his father are out searching for Steiner's widow in the darkness, with voices "business-like and competent and patient", apparently intent on helping Manfred say goodbye to his mother.


## Adaptations


### Film
Brian Aldiss tried to convince Stanley Kubrick to make a film based on the novel but Kubrick was not interested, recalling "Stanley simply swept my suggestion out of the way. No discussion. No time to be wasted."[3]
In 2013, writer-director Dee Rees planned to create a film adaptation of Martian Time-Slip.[4] Although ultimately she did not complete the film, her efforts introduced her to Isa Dick Hackett, Dick's daughter, and led to the creation of the acclaimed Electric Dreams television series, which is based on Dick's work.[5]


### Audiobook
A Martian Time-Slip audiobook — read by Grover Gardner (possibly under his alias Tom Parker), unabridged, approximately 9 hours over 6 audio cassettes — was released in 1998.
A second unabridged audiobook version of Martian Time-Slip was released in 2007. Also read by Grover Gardner, it runs approximately 9.5 hours over 8 CDs. It was released under the title Martian Time-Slip and The Golden Man, and also includes a reading of Dick's short story "The Golden Man."


## Critical reception
Critical reception of Martian Time-Slip has been mostly positive, with critics praising the novel for its handling of historical erasure, colonialism, immigration, and mental illness. Susan Weeber[6] argues that the colonization of the Bleekmen of Mars is a metaphor for the Western colonization of indigenous peoples. The efforts of the Public School to maintain a "correct" version of history, justified in the novel by a desire to prevent mental illness, are seen by Weeber as efforts to erase marginalized perspectives. Martian Time-Slip's "near-future" setting, culturally similar to 1960s America, reinforces its position as a contemporary critique. Elena Corioni[7] argues that Martian Time-Slip was ahead of its time in terms of its handling of climate change. She notes that the possibility of humans escaping the consequences of climate change by colonizing Mars is becoming more of a possibility than science fiction, and that the novel is an effective criticism of that idea. Colonists displace the Bleekmen, who were able to live sustainably on Mars indefinitely, in favor of creating a broken capitalist dystopia that is destined to destroy the climate of Mars the same way it destroyed the climate of Earth.


## See also
United Nations in popular culture


## References
^ "All We Marsmen". Archived from the original on October 31, 2019. Retrieved January 16, 2015.
^ AM-WEB is actually a contraction of the German phrase "Alle Menschen werden Brüder" (All men become brothers) from Schiller's An die Freude (Ode to Joy).
^ "Celluloid Memories – Brian Aldiss". June 5, 2011. Archived from the original on August 28, 2021. Retrieved August 28, 2021.
^ Yamato, Jen (October 17, 2013). "Dee Rees To Adapt Philip K. Dick's 'Martian Time-Slip'". Deadline. Archived from the original on December 8, 2015. Retrieved March 21, 2021.
^ Roffman, Marisa (June 5, 2018). "How the 2016 Election Influenced 'Philip K. Dick's Electric Dreams' Adaptation". Variety. Archived from the original on November 26, 2020. Retrieved March 21, 2021.
^ Weeber, Susan Cooke (October 19, 2016). "Archival Impulses, Historical Anxieties: Preservation and Erasure in Philip K. Dick's Martian Time-Slip". Critique: Studies in Contemporary Fiction. 57 (5): 579–588. doi:10.1080/00111619.2016.1149796. ISSN 0011-1619. S2CID 163417573.
^ Corioni, Elena (May 31, 2020). "Apocalyptic Visions from the Past: The Colonization of Mars in Dick's Martian Time-Slip". JAm It! (Journal of American Studies in Italy) (3): 87–108. doi:10.13135/2612-5641/4142. ISSN 2612-5641. Archived from the original on April 14, 2021. Retrieved April 1, 2021.
v
t
e
Bibliography
Lost works
Gather Yourselves Together (1950)
Voices from the Street (1952)
Solar Lottery (1954)
Mary and the Giant (1954)
The World Jones Made (1954)
Eye in the Sky (1955)
The Man Who Japed (1955)
A Time for George Stavros (1956)
Pilgrim on the Hill (1956)
The Broken Bubble (1956)
The Cosmic Puppets (1957)
Puttering About in a Small Land (1957)
Nicholas and the Higs (1958)
Time Out of Joint (1958)
In Milton Lumky Territory (1958)
Confessions of a Crap Artist (1959)
The Man Whose Teeth Were All Exactly Alike (1960)
Humpty Dumpty in Oakland (1960)
Vulcan's Hammer (1960)
Dr. Futurity (1960)
The Man in the High Castle (1961)
We Can Build You (1962)
Martian Time-Slip (1962)
Dr. Bloodmoney, or How We Got Along After the Bomb (1963)
The Game-Players of Titan (1963)
The Simulacra (1963)
The Crack in Space (1963)
Clans of the Alphane Moon (1964)
The Three Stigmata of Palmer Eldritch (1964)
The Zap Gun (1964)
The Penultimate Truth (1964)
The Unteleported Man (1964)
The Ganymede Takeover (1965)
Counter-Clock World (1965)
Do Androids Dream of Electric Sheep? (1966)
Nick and the Glimmung (1966)
Now Wait for Last Year (1966)
Ubik (1966)
Galactic Pot-Healer (1968)
A Maze of Death (1968)
Our Friends from Frolix 8 (1969)
Flow My Tears, the Policeman Said (1974)
Deus Irae (1976)
Radio Free Albemuth (1976; published 1985)
A Scanner Darkly (1977)
Valis (1981)
The Divine Invasion (1981)
The Transmigration of Timothy Archer (1982)
The Owl in Daylight (unfinished)
A Handful of Darkness (1955)
The Variable Man (1956)
The Preserving Machine (1969)
The Book of Philip K. Dick (1973)
The Best of Philip K. Dick (1977)
The Golden Man (1980)
Robots, Androids, and Mechanical Oddities (1984)
I Hope I Shall Arrive Soon (1985)
The Collected Stories of Philip K. Dick (1987)
Beyond Lies the Wub (1988)
The Dark Haired Girl (1989)
The Father-Thing (1989)
Second Variety (1989)
The Days of Perky Pat (1990)
The Little Black Box (1990)
The Short Happy Life of the Brown Oxford (1990)
We Can Remember It for You Wholesale (1990)
The Minority Report (1991)
Second Variety (1991)
The Eye of the Sibyl (1992)
The Philip K. Dick Reader (1997)
Minority Report (2002)
Selected Stories of Philip K. Dick (2002)
Paycheck (2004)
Vintage PKD (2006)
The Exegesis of Philip K. Dick (2011)
"Beyond Lies the Wub" (1952)
"The Gun" (1952)
"The Skull" (1952)
"The Little Movement" (1952)
"The Defenders" (1953)
"Mr. Spaceship" (1953)
"Piper in the Woods" (1953)
"Roog" (1953)
"The Infinites" (1953)
"Second Variety" (1953)
"Colony" (1953)
"The Cookie Lady" (1953)
"Impostor" (1953)
"Paycheck" (1953)
"The Preserving Machine" (1953)
"Expendable" (1953)
"The Indefatigable Frog" (1953)
"The Commuter" (1953)
"Out in the Garden" (1953)
"The Great C" (1953)
"The King of the Elves" (1953)
"The Trouble with Bubbles" (1953)
"The Variable Man" (1953)
"The Impossible Planet" (1953)
"Planet for Transients" (1953)
"The Builder" (1953)
"Tony and the Beetles" (1953)
"The Hanging Stranger" (1953)
"Prize Ship" (1954)
"Beyond the Door" (1954)
"The Crystal Crypt" (1954)
"The Short Happy Life of the Brown Oxford" (1954)
"The Golden Man" (1954)
"Sales Pitch" (1954)
"Breakfast at Twilight" (1954)
"The Crawlers" (1954)
"Exhibit Piece" (1954)
"Adjustment Team" (1954)
"Shell Game" (1954)
"Meddler" (1954)
"A World of Talent" (1954)
"The Last of the Masters" (1954)
"Upon the Dull Earth" (1954)
"The Father-thing" (1954)
"Strange Eden" (1954)
"The Turning Wheel" (1954)
"Foster, You're Dead!" (1955)
"Human Is" (1955)
"War Veteran" (1955)
"Captive Market" (1955)
"Nanny" (1955)
"The Chromium Fence" (1955)
"Service Call" (1955)
"The Mold of Yancy" (1955)
"Autofac" (1955)
"Psi-man Heal My Child!" (1955)
"The Hood Maker" (1955)
"The Minority Report" (1956)
"Pay for the Printer" (1956)
"A Glass of Darkness (The Cosmic Puppets)" (1956)
"The Unreconstructed M" (1957)
"Null-O" (1958)
"Explorers We" (1959)
"Recall Mechanism" (1959)
"Fair Game" (1959)
"War Game" (1959)
"All We Marsmen" (1963)
"What'll We Do with Ragland Park?" (1963)
"The Days of Perky Pat" (1963)
"If There Were No Benny Cemoli" (1963)
"Waterspider" (1964)
"Novelty Act" (1964)
"Oh, to Be a Blobel!" (1964)
"The War with the Fnools" (1964)
"What the Dead Men Say" (1964)
"Orpheus with Clay Feet" (1964)
"Cantata 140" (1964)
"The Unteleported Man" (1964)
"The Little Black Box" (1964)
"Retreat Syndrome" (1965)
"Project Plowshare (later "The Zap Gun")" (1965)
"We Can Remember It for You Wholesale" (1966)
"Holy Quarrel" (1966)
"Faith of Our Fathers" (1967)
"Not by Its Cover" (1968)
"The Electric Ant" (1969)
"A. Lincoln, Simulacrum" (1969)
"The Pre-persons" (1974)
"A Little Something for Us Tempunauts" (1974)
"The Exit Door Leads In" (1979)
"Rautavaara's Case" (1980)
"I Hope I Shall Arrive Soon" (1980)
"The Eye of the Sibyl" (1987)
"Stability" (1987)
"The Android and the Human" (1972)
"If You Find This World Bad, You Should See Some of the Others" (1977)
Blade Runner (1982)
Total Recall (1990)
Barjo (1992)
Screamers (1995)
Impostor (2001)
Minority Report (2002)
Paycheck (2003)
A Scanner Darkly (2006)
Next (2007)
Screamers: The Hunting (2009)
Radio Free Albemuth (2010)
The Adjustment Bureau (2011)
Total Recall (2012)
Blade Runner 2049 (2017)
2036: Nexus Dawn (2017)
2048: Nowhere to Run (2017)
Blade Runner Black Out 2022 (2017)
Total Recall 2070 (1999)
The Man in the High Castle (2015–2019)
Minority Report (2015)
Electric Dreams (2017–2018)
Blade Runner: Black Lotus (2021–2022)
Blade Runner 2099 (upcoming)
Blade Runner franchise
Only Apparently Real (1986 biography)
I Am Alive and You Are Dead (1993 biography)
Your Name Here (2008 drama film)
Isa Dick Hackett (daughter)
Philip K. Dick Award
Category
VIAF


URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Three_Stigmata_of_Palmer_Eldritch
Content:

The Three Stigmata of Palmer Eldritch is a 1964 science fiction novel by American writer Philip K. Dick. It was nominated for the Nebula Award for Best Novel in 1965.[1] Like many of Dick's novels, it utilizes an array of science fiction concepts and explores the ambiguous slippage between reality and unreality. It is one of Dick's first works to explore religious themes.
The novel takes place in a future 2016 where humankind has colonized every habitable planet and moon in the Solar System. To cope with the difficult life away from Earth, colonists rely on the illegal hallucinogen Can-D, secretly distributed by corporate head Leo Bulero. New tensions arise with the rumor that merchant explorer Palmer Eldritch has returned from an expedition in possession of a new alien hallucinogen to compete with Can-D.


## Plot summary
The story begins in a future world where global temperatures have risen so high that in most of the world it is unsafe to be outside without special cooling gear during daylight hours. In a desperate bid to preserve humanity and ease population burdens on Earth, the UN has initiated a "draft" for colonizing the nearby planets, where conditions are so horrific and primitive that the unwilling colonists have fallen prey to a form of escapism involving the use of an illegal drug (Can-D) in concert with "layouts". Layouts are physical props intended to simulate a sort of alternative reality where life is easier than either the grim existence of the colonists in their marginal off-world colonies, or even Earth, where global warming has progressed to the point that Antarctica is prime vacation resort territory. The illegal drug Can-D allows people to "share" their experience of the "Perky Pat" (the name of the main female character in the simulated world) layouts. This "sharing" has caused a pseudo-religious cult or series of cults to grow up around the layouts and the use of the drug.
Up to the point where the novel begins, New York City-based Perky Pat (or P.P.) Layouts, Inc., has held a monopoly on this product, as well as on the illegal trade in the drug Can-D which makes the shared hallucinations possible.
The novel opens shortly after Barney Mayerson, P.P. Layouts' top precog, has received a "draft notice" from the UN for involuntary resettlement as a colonist on Mars. Mayerson is sleeping with his assistant, Roni Fugate, but remains conflicted about the divorce, which he himself initiated, from his first wife Emily, a ceramic pot artist. Meanwhile, Emily's second husband tries to sell her pot designs to P.P. Layouts as possible accessories for the Perky Pat virtual worlds—but Barney, recognizing them as Emily's, rejects them out of spite.
Meanwhile, the UN rescues Palmer Eldritch's ship from a crash on Pluto. Leo Bulero, head of P.P. Layouts and an "evolved" human (meaning someone who has undergone expensive genetic treatments by a German "doctor" which are supposed to push the client "forward" on an evolutionary scale, and which result in gross physical, as well as mental, modifications), hears rumors that Eldritch discovered an alien hallucinogen in the Prox system with similar properties to Can-D, and that he plans to market it as "Chew-Z", with UN approval, on off-world colonies. However Chew-Z does not require the prop of the external layouts and seems to have certain undefined qualities that make the use of Chew-Z even more addictive than Can-D has been. This would effectively destroy the need for P.P. Layouts. Bulero tries to contact Eldritch but he is quarantined at a UN hospital. Both Mayerson and Fugate have precognitions of reports that Bulero is going to be responsible for murdering Eldritch.
Under the guise of a reporter, Bulero travels to Eldritch's estate on the Moon, where Eldritch holds a press conference. Bulero is kidnapped and forced to take Chew-Z intravenously. He enters a psychic netherworld over which both he and Eldritch seemingly have some control. After wrangling about business with Eldritch, Bulero travels to what appears to be Earth at some time in the not-too-distant future. Evolved humans identify him as a ghost and show him a monument to himself commemorating his role in the death of Eldritch, an "enemy of the Sol System".
Bulero returns to Earth and fires Mayerson because Mayerson was afraid to travel to the Moon to rescue him. Mayerson, in despair, accepts his UN conscription to Mars but Bulero recruits him as a double agent. Mayerson is to inject himself with a toxin after taking Chew-Z in a plot to deceive the UN into thinking Chew-Z is harmful and cause them to ban it.
On Mars, Mayerson buys some Chew-Z from Eldritch, who appears in holographic form. Mayerson tries to hallucinate a world where he is still with Emily but finds that he does not control his apparent hallucination. Like Bulero, he finds himself in the future. Mayerson arrives in New York two years hence where he speaks with Bulero, Fugate and his future self about the death of Palmer Eldritch.
He also encounters several manifestations of Eldritch, identifiable by their robotic right hand, artificial eyes, and steel teeth. Eldritch offers to help Mayerson become whatever he wants, but is so controlling of the Chew-Z alternative reality that Mayerson ultimately decides he would rather be dead than continue to be manipulated by Eldritch. When a despairing Mayerson chooses death, he finds himself apparently forced into Eldritch's body right at the point in the timeline where Bulero is ready to shoot a torpedo at Eldritch's ship. It appears that Eldritch's plan is to preserve his own life essence housed in Mayerson's body while allowing Mayerson himself to die in Eldritch's place. Eldritch, meanwhile, intends to live on in Mayerson's form and enjoy the simple if arduous life of a Martian colonist. Mayerson, stuck in Eldritch's body and mistaken for him, is indeed nearly killed by Bulero in the near future, but before the fatal shot can be fired he is awakened from his Chew-Z trance in the present by Bulero, who has just arrived on Mars.
Bulero is willing to take Mayerson back to Earth but refuses to after learning that Mayerson did not inject himself with the toxin. Mayerson is now confident that Bulero will kill Eldritch, so the sacrifice of taking the toxin in order to ruin Eldritch's business is unnecessary, but he does not try to convince Bulero of this. Later, Mayerson discusses his experience with a neo-Christian colonist and they conclude that either Eldritch became a god in the Prox system or some god-like being has taken his place. Mayerson is convinced some aspect of Eldritch is still inside him, and that as long as he refuses to take Chew-Z again, it is Eldritch who will actually be killed by Bulero in the near future; Mayerson is half-resigned, half-hopeful about taking on the life of a Martian colonist without reprieve. Mayerson considers the possibility of Eldritch being what humans have always thought of as a god, but inimical, or perhaps merely an inferior aspect of a bigger and better sort of god.
The novel has an ambiguous ending, with Bulero heading back toward Earth, and apparent proliferation of Eldritch's cyborg body 'stigmata', which may mean that Bulero is still trapped in Eldritch's hallucinatory domain, or that Chew-Z is becoming increasingly popular among Terrans and Martian colonists.


## Material used from prior work
The Perky Pat and Connie Companion products were introduced in the novelette "The Days of Perky Pat" published in 1963. However, the novel is not a continuation (e.g. "What the Dead Men Say" and the novel Ubik) or expansion (e.g. the novella and later novel Vulcan's Hammer) of an earlier and shorter work.
Early in Chapter 3 a reference is made to "... the Printers, the Biltong life forms ..." taken from the short story "Pay for the Printer", published in 1956.
Precognition as an accepted vocation figures heavily in the plot of Dick's short story "The Minority Report" (first published in 1956) and in his 1970 novel Our Friends from Frolix 8.


## Reception and legacy
Algis Budrys of Galaxy Science Fiction described the novel as "an important, beautifully controlled, smoothly created book which will twist your mind if you give it the least chance to do so". He praised Dick's accomplishment, saying "the whole creation resonates to the touch of the only present science-fiction writer who could possibly have done it" and characterizes the result as "a witty, sometimes lighthearted, and always fascinating piece of fiction".[2] Budrys later named the book the best science-fiction novel of his first year as reviewer for the magazine, reporting that others "are calling it some kind of half-conscious failure".[3]
Weird fiction writer China Mieville listed this book as one of his top weird fiction books of all time, saying "It's infuriating to have to choose just one of Dick's works – he is the outstanding figure in SF. In the end I went for Stigmata because I remember how I felt when I put it down. Hollow and beaten. I kept thinking: 'That's it. It's finished. Literature has been finished.'"[4]
In a 2003 retrospective review, sci-fi and fantasy author Michael Moorcock criticized The Three Stigmata of Palmer Eldritch as thematically "incoherent", complaining about Dick's lack of an "idiosyncratic structure or style".[5]
Reflecting on the challenges of writing during a personal and spiritual crisis, Philip K. Dick expressed deep ambivalence about the novel. In his 1968 essay Self Portrait, he remarked, "I enjoyed writing all of them [...] But this leaves out the most vital of them all: THE 3 STIGMATA OF PALMER ELDRITCH. I am afraid of that book; it deals with absolute evil, and I wrote it during a great crisis in my religious beliefs. I decided to write a novel dealing with absolute evil as personified in the form of a 'human'. When the galleys came from Doubleday I couldn't correct them because I could not bear to read the text, and this is still true."[6]


## See also
Novels portal
Simulated reality
Existenz (1999 film)
Inception (2010 film)


## References
^ "1965 Award Winners & Nominees". Worlds Without End. Retrieved September 27, 2009.
^ Budrys, Algis (August 1965). "Galaxy Bookshelf". Galaxy Science Fiction. pp. 186–194.
^ Budrys, Algis (February 1966). "Galaxy Bookshelf". Galaxy Science Fiction. pp. 131–139.
^ Guardian Staff (May 15, 2002). "China Miéville's top 10 weird fiction books". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Retrieved September 5, 2019.
^ Moorcock, Michael (March 14, 2003). "A difficult gift". The Guardian. Retrieved May 13, 2019.
^ Dick, Philip K.; Sutin, Lawrence (1995). The shifting realities of Philip K. Dick: selected literary and philosophical writings (1st ed.). New York: Pantheon Books. p. 17. ISBN 978-0-679-42644-8.


## Sources
Rossi, Umberto. "Dick e la questione della tecnica (o Della tecnologia)", Technology and the American Imagination: An Ongoing Challenge, Atti del XII Convegno biennale AISNA, Eds. Mamoli Zorzi and Bisutti de Riz, Venezia: Supernova, 1994, p. 473–83.
Tuck, Donald H. (1974). The Encyclopedia of Science Fiction and Fantasy. Chicago: Advent. p. 142. ISBN 0-911682-20-1.


## External links
The Three Stigmata of Palmer Eldritch title listing at the Internet Speculative Fiction Database
The Three Stigmata of Palmer Eldritch at Open Library
v
t
e
Bibliography
Lost works
Gather Yourselves Together (1950)
Voices from the Street (1952)
Solar Lottery (1954)
Mary and the Giant (1954)
The World Jones Made (1954)
Eye in the Sky (1955)
The Man Who Japed (1955)
A Time for George Stavros (1956)
Pilgrim on the Hill (1956)
The Broken Bubble (1956)
The Cosmic Puppets (1957)
Puttering About in a Small Land (1957)
Nicholas and the Higs (1958)
Time Out of Joint (1958)
In Milton Lumky Territory (1958)
Confessions of a Crap Artist (1959)
The Man Whose Teeth Were All Exactly Alike (1960)
Humpty Dumpty in Oakland (1960)
Vulcan's Hammer (1960)
Dr. Futurity (1960)
The Man in the High Castle (1961)
We Can Build You (1962)
Martian Time-Slip (1962)
Dr. Bloodmoney, or How We Got Along After the Bomb (1963)
The Game-Players of Titan (1963)
The Simulacra (1963)
The Crack in Space (1963)
Clans of the Alphane Moon (1964)
The Three Stigmata of Palmer Eldritch (1964)
The Zap Gun (1964)
The Penultimate Truth (1964)
The Unteleported Man (1964)
The Ganymede Takeover (1965)
Counter-Clock World (1965)
Do Androids Dream of Electric Sheep? (1966)
Nick and the Glimmung (1966)
Now Wait for Last Year (1966)
Ubik (1966)
Galactic Pot-Healer (1968)
A Maze of Death (1968)
Our Friends from Frolix 8 (1969)
Flow My Tears, the Policeman Said (1974)
Deus Irae (1976)
Radio Free Albemuth (1976; published 1985)
A Scanner Darkly (1977)
Valis (1981)
The Divine Invasion (1981)
The Transmigration of Timothy Archer (1982)
The Owl in Daylight (unfinished)
A Handful of Darkness (1955)
The Variable Man (1956)
The Preserving Machine (1969)
The Book of Philip K. Dick (1973)
The Best of Philip K. Dick (1977)
The Golden Man (1980)
Robots, Androids, and Mechanical Oddities (1984)
I Hope I Shall Arrive Soon (1985)
The Collected Stories of Philip K. Dick (1987)
Beyond Lies the Wub (1988)
The Dark Haired Girl (1989)
The Father-Thing (1989)
Second Variety (1989)
The Days of Perky Pat (1990)
The Little Black Box (1990)
The Short Happy Life of the Brown Oxford (1990)
We Can Remember It for You Wholesale (1990)
The Minority Report (1991)
Second Variety (1991)
The Eye of the Sibyl (1992)
The Philip K. Dick Reader (1997)
Minority Report (2002)
Selected Stories of Philip K. Dick (2002)
Paycheck (2004)
Vintage PKD (2006)
The Exegesis of Philip K. Dick (2011)
"Beyond Lies the Wub" (1952)
"The Gun" (1952)
"The Skull" (1952)
"The Little Movement" (1952)
"The Defenders" (1953)
"Mr. Spaceship" (1953)
"Piper in the Woods" (1953)
"Roog" (1953)
"The Infinites" (1953)
"Second Variety" (1953)
"Colony" (1953)
"The Cookie Lady" (1953)
"Impostor" (1953)
"Paycheck" (1953)
"The Preserving Machine" (1953)
"Expendable" (1953)
"The Indefatigable Frog" (1953)
"The Commuter" (1953)
"Out in the Garden" (1953)
"The Great C" (1953)
"The King of the Elves" (1953)
"The Trouble with Bubbles" (1953)
"The Variable Man" (1953)
"The Impossible Planet" (1953)
"Planet for Transients" (1953)
"The Builder" (1953)
"Tony and the Beetles" (1953)
"The Hanging Stranger" (1953)
"Prize Ship" (1954)
"Beyond the Door" (1954)
"The Crystal Crypt" (1954)
"The Short Happy Life of the Brown Oxford" (1954)
"The Golden Man" (1954)
"Sales Pitch" (1954)
"Breakfast at Twilight" (1954)
"The Crawlers" (1954)
"Exhibit Piece" (1954)
"Adjustment Team" (1954)
"Shell Game" (1954)
"Meddler" (1954)
"A World of Talent" (1954)
"The Last of the Masters" (1954)
"Upon the Dull Earth" (1954)
"The Father-thing" (1954)
"Strange Eden" (1954)
"The Turning Wheel" (1954)
"Foster, You're Dead!" (1955)
"Human Is" (1955)
"War Veteran" (1955)
"Captive Market" (1955)
"Nanny" (1955)
"The Chromium Fence" (1955)
"Service Call" (1955)
"The Mold of Yancy" (1955)
"Autofac" (1955)
"Psi-man Heal My Child!" (1955)
"The Hood Maker" (1955)
"The Minority Report" (1956)
"Pay for the Printer" (1956)
"A Glass of Darkness (The Cosmic Puppets)" (1956)
"The Unreconstructed M" (1957)
"Null-O" (1958)
"Explorers We" (1959)
"Recall Mechanism" (1959)
"Fair Game" (1959)
"War Game" (1959)
"All We Marsmen" (1963)
"What'll We Do with Ragland Park?" (1963)
"The Days of Perky Pat" (1963)
"If There Were No Benny Cemoli" (1963)
"Waterspider" (1964)
"Novelty Act" (1964)
"Oh, to Be a Blobel!" (1964)
"The War with the Fnools" (1964)
"What the Dead Men Say" (1964)
"Orpheus with Clay Feet" (1964)
"Cantata 140" (1964)
"The Unteleported Man" (1964)
"The Little Black Box" (1964)
"Retreat Syndrome" (1965)
"Project Plowshare (later "The Zap Gun")" (1965)
"We Can Remember It for You Wholesale" (1966)
"Holy Quarrel" (1966)
"Faith of Our Fathers" (1967)
"Not by Its Cover" (1968)
"The Electric Ant" (1969)
"A. Lincoln, Simulacrum" (1969)
"The Pre-persons" (1974)
"A Little Something for Us Tempunauts" (1974)
"The Exit Door Leads In" (1979)
"Rautavaara's Case" (1980)
"I Hope I Shall Arrive Soon" (1980)
"The Eye of the Sibyl" (1987)
"Stability" (1987)
"The Android and the Human" (1972)
"If You Find This World Bad, You Should See Some of the Others" (1977)
Blade Runner (1982)
Total Recall (1990)
Barjo (1992)
Screamers (1995)
Impostor (2001)
Minority Report (2002)
Paycheck (2003)
A Scanner Darkly (2006)
Next (2007)
Screamers: The Hunting (2009)
Radio Free Albemuth (2010)
The Adjustment Bureau (2011)
Total Recall (2012)
Blade Runner 2049 (2017)
2036: Nexus Dawn (2017)
2048: Nowhere to Run (2017)
Blade Runner Black Out 2022 (2017)
Total Recall 2070 (1999)
The Man in the High Castle (2015–2019)
Minority Report (2015)
Electric Dreams (2017–2018)
Blade Runner: Black Lotus (2021–2022)
Blade Runner 2099 (upcoming)
Blade Runner franchise
Only Apparently Real (1986 biography)
I Am Alive and You Are Dead (1993 biography)
Your Name Here (2008 drama film)
Isa Dick Hackett (daughter)
Philip K. Dick Award
Category


URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Wanderer_(Fritz_Leiber_novel)
Content:

The Wanderer is a science fiction novel by American writer Fritz Leiber, published as a paperback original by Ballantine Books in 1964. It won the 1965 Hugo Award for Best Novel.
Following its initial paperback edition, The Wanderer was reissued in hardcover by Walker & Co. in 1969, by Gregg Press in 1980, and by the Easton Press in 1991, as well as a Science Fiction Book Club edition in 1987. It was released in hardcover in the UK by Dennis Dobson in 1967, with a paperback edition following from Penguin Books in 1969. Translations have appeared in Dutch, French, German, Hungarian and Italian.[1]
The Wanderer was the first novel to win the Hugo Award without previously being published in hardcover or appearing in some form in a genre magazine.[2]
The novel deals with a wandering planet that enters the Solar System. Its narrative follows multiple disconnected groups of characters to portray the widespread impact of the Wanderer on the entire population of the Earth (and above it) as well as the varied reactions of different groups as they struggle to cope and survive.


## Plot
The novel is set in a future, a few years after its 1964 publication date. The Space Race is still ongoing. Both the USA and the USSR have lunar bases, but the Soviets have retained their early lead by sending an expedition to Mars. The Vietnam War continues, but seems not to be a big issue for US citizens. Also an underground anti-Communist army now operates within North Vietnam. Some independent outsiders bring supplies by sea to both sides. Technology is much the same, apart from better spaceflight.
From the point of view of most of the population of the Earth, a new planet appears out of nowhere close to the Moon towards the end of a total lunar eclipse. It is attended by a twinkling of stars, which some astronomers explain as the planet emerging out of hyperspace. This is later confirmed by a man captured by a feline humanoid, and she also explains that the moon was destroyed to fuel the wandering planet.
The planet's appearance is startling: several massive patterns of purple and gold, and initially resembling the Tao symbol of human culture.
Within a few days the planet—soon referred to by everyone simply as "The Wanderer"—consumes the Moon. Its gravity causes mass death and destruction as it raises huge ocean waves and causes earthquakes and volcanic eruptions. Flying saucers appear, apparently trying to mitigate some of the disastrous effects. Then, after a spectacular battle in space between the new planet and yet another which had appeared just as suddenly, the skies are empty again. Earth is left without its Moon.
The novel follows the lives of disparate people around the globe. There is a man attempting a solo crossing of the Atlantic Ocean, a smuggler operating off the coast of Vietnam, two friends in England, a trio of drug addicts in New York City, and the military controllers of the USA Moon mission, deep in a bunker somewhere near Washington, D.C.
The main protagonists are three longtime friends. Paul Hagbolt is escorting Margo Gelhorn (and her cat, Miaow) to observe the lunar eclipse at an observatory in California. Their friend, and Margo's fiance, is Don Merriam, one of the American astronauts at the Moon base. Following on a whim a sign advertising a "flying saucer symposium", Paul and Margo fall in with a group of intellectuals, dreamers, charlatans and misfits. At that point events overtake them. The new planet appears and triggers an earthquake that buries their cars in a landslide. They must avoid tsunamis, more earthquakes, roving mobs and flying saucers to survive. On the Moon Don Merriam is the only astronaut to escape the destruction of the American moonbase. He tries to take off in one of the base's spaceships, only to fall through the Moon itself as it splits asunder under the influence of the new planet. His ship is eventually captured by its crew.
Events take a bizarre turn when the group of saucer enthusiasts is faced with a tsunami. A flying saucer appears, and a cat-like being uses some kind of gun to repel the waves. Then the being uses the same device to pull Paul, who is holding Miaow, into the saucer. At the same time the gun falls into the hands of the people on the ground.
In the saucer Paul meets a being calling itself Tigerishka. A large, female telepathic feline creature, she initially mistakes Miaow as the intelligent being (whose thoughts she can hear), and Paul as a "monkey". Realizing her mistake, she regards Paul with contempt. Monkey-beings are not well regarded by her people. However she slowly warms to him, and explains why her planet had consumed the Moon.
Like many of the human characters, her people are intellectuals, dreamers, charlatans and misfits. They belong to a culture that spans the Universe, has achieved immortality, and can construct planets and traverse hyperspace. They can even create bodies for themselves that reflect the origins of their races, such as Tigerishka's cat-form. They are, however, fleeing their culture's police. The standard culture rejects nonconformists, and devotes itself to ensuring that intelligent life survives to the end of time, whereas Tigerishka's cohort wants to explore hyperspace and tinker with space, time and the Mind. Their flight has brought them to Earth orbit to refuel as huge amounts of matter must be converted to energy to power their hyperspace drive and their weapons: the Wanderer is running on empty.
As alien as Tigerishka is, Paul becomes besotted with her. Tigerishka eventually yields to his advances. At the same time, Don Merriam has been rescued with his ship by the Wanderer's other spaceships. He is reunited with Paul aboard Tigerishka's ship. Now they must testify in the Wanderer's trial, for the police have arrived. A second planet, "The Stranger", colored a dull gray where the Wanderer is bright purple and yellow, appears and threatens battle. Don and Paul give their testimony as to the good treatment they have seen, along with thousands of other humans appearing by some kind of holographic projection. However the trial goes badly. Paul and Don are evacuated in Don's ship, placed into position close to Earth by Tigerishka. Tigerishka takes Miaow with her back to her planet. Then the final battle takes place, and both planets disappear. In the final scene, Margo and her companions walk to Vandenberg Spaceport as Don's ship comes in to land.


## Characters


### The three friends
Margo Gelhorn, Paul Hagbolt and Donald Merriam have been friends since High School. Don became an astronaut, and Paul followed him into NASA by using his journalism qualifications to become a publicist for the agency. Margo eventually bestowed her affections on Don and became his fiancee. This left Paul with unrequited feelings for her, although Margo tells Paul that his feelings for Don are "more than brotherly". The three form an odd triangle. Margo herself is manipulative and exploits both Paul and Don to serve her ends. Don is a loner at heart, however. The triangle is set to fly apart. Their collision with the Saucer Symposium provides the trigger.


### The Saucer Symposium
When Paul and Margo encounter the Saucer Symposium on the beach near Vandenberg, they give the participants nicknames.
"Doc" (Rudolf Brecht) is a relentless debunker of UFO myths and a top-notch piano salesman. He is one of the symposium organizers and chairmen.
"Turban" (Rama Joan) is a mystic who wears a turban and a man's tuxedo. She was once the wife of a New York stockbroker but abandoned the comfortable lifestyle to lecture on mysticism and participate in events like the Symposium as a search for enlightenment.
"Beardy" (Prof. Ross Hunter) is a sociologist from Oregon State University. He originally began studying UFO groups but became interested in the subject itself. During the adventures caused by the appearance of the Wanderer, he gets close to Margo and eventually seduces her, in the process exposing and neutralizing her manipulative instincts.
"The Little Man" (Clarence Dowd) is a meticulous documenter of UFO events. He draws the Wanderer as it shows its different faces to Earth. These drawings appear in the book.
"The Ramrod" (Charlie Furby) is a tough-looking man who is really a fantasist. He insists that he has been transported to planets such as Ispan, whose location only he knows, but later admits he did this entirely in his fantasies. He is accompanied by two women who may both be his wives, part of a polygamous sect.


### New Yorkers
Sally Harris and Jake Lesher are looking for a good time and thinking about writing a play. They start with an amorous encounter on a Coney Island roller coaster, achieving orgasm the instant the Wanderer appears. They wander through the crowds in Times Square, then take refuge in a penthouse apartment as the flood begins. They barely survive as the tsunami caused by Wanderer and the Stranger almost reaches the roof.
Arab Jones, Pepe Martinez and High Bundy are stoners. High on marijuana, they chase the sight of the Wanderer through the streets of New York, making up crazy stories about it. They are eventually drowned by the in-rushing flood in a subway station.


### Floridians
Barbara Katz is another adventurous young woman with an agenda. She catches an old millionaire, Knolls K. Kettering III, spying on her with his telescope while she sunbathes. Deciding to become his "friend" she dons a black "playsuit" and sneaks into his yard during the eclipse, finding him observing the event with the same telescope. With "KKK" and his black servants, she tries to escape the flood tides by driving to high ground in the limousine. Dodging racist policemen and a delegation of Ku Klux Klan vigilantes they ride out one flood by climbing trees, then find a washed-up yacht in which they survive the subsequent catastrophes.


### An undisclosed location
General "Spike" Stevens and Colonel Mabel Wallingford are two members of Mission Control team for the Moonbase, stationed deep underground somewhere near Washington D.C. At first they think the events are a "problem", a simulation created by their superiors to test their readiness. Not long after they realize that the events on their screens are real, the facility floods with water. Stevens and Wallingford are left trapped together. Fully aware they are about to die, they find their final release in each other, despite having hated each other from the moment they met.


### In Great Britain
Dai Davies and Richard Hillary enjoy a drink together in the English county of Somerset and then go their separate ways. Hillary returns to the Home Counties of England but is caught in the exodus from the lowlands as tides flood the Thames basin. He survives by reaching high ground in the Malvern Hills. Davies, a romantic poet, composes odes to the new planet and then attempts to walk to Wales across the apparently dry estuary of the river Severn. He is finally engulfed in a huge version of the Severn bore and drowns.


### At sea
Wolf Loner is attempting a solo crossing of the Atlantic. Because of bad weather, and the loss of radio communication, he has no idea that anything is happening in the sky. His first inkling that anything strange has happened is when his boat bumps up against the bell tower of Old North Church in Boston.
Bagong Bung is a smuggler supplying both sides in a guerrilla war, operating off the coast of Vietnam. The suddenly large tides uncover a wreck on the sea floor, which he loots for treasure.
Off the coast of South America, the atomic powered cruise liner Prince Charles is hijacked by revolutionaries. Flood tides carry it deep into the Amazon basin where it eventually comes to rest on land, like Noah's Ark, with hundreds of passengers.


## Reception
P. Schuyler Miller described the book as a "thoroughly uncharacteristic" Leiber novel, saying that "the feel of what is happening . . . counts for more than the plot" and predicting that The Wanderer "would eventually be awarded 'classic' status".[3] Avram Davidson compared the novel unfavorably to Leiber's Conjure Wife, saying "The canvas is wide, the characters many, the charge scatters like buckshot, if you can imagine a buckshot cannon".[4]
James Nicoll has described the novel as "terrible", saying that although its premise — "hollow planets filled with catgirls who want to steal the moon" — may be "amazing or at least intriguing", the novel itself "falls well short of its potential"; he attributes its Hugo win to a weak slate of nominees, and to Leiber's "blatant and unabashed sucking up to SF fandom".[5]


## Availability
The Wanderer is available in paperback under ISBN 0-575-07112-5 (Gollancz, 2000) as part of the SF Masterworks series.


## References
^ ISFDB publishing history
^ Donald Franson & Howard DeVore, A History of the Hugo, Nebula, and International Fantasy Awards, 1976
^ "The Reference Library", Analog, November 1964, p.87
^ "Books", F&SF, August 1964, p.23
^ A Good Day to Run, by James Nicoll, at JamesDavisNicoll.com; published March 12, 2017; retrieved March 12, 2017


## External links
The Wanderer title listing at the Internet Speculative Fiction Database
The Wanderer at the Library of Congress
v
t
e
Conjure Wife (1943)
Destiny Times Three (1945)
The Big Time (1961)
The Wanderer (1964)
Tarzan and the Valley of Gold (1966)
A Specter Is Haunting Texas (1969)
Our Lady of Darkness (1977)
Two Sought Adventure (1957)
Swords and Deviltry (1970)
Swords Against Death (1970)
Swords in the Mist (1968)
Swords Against Wizardry (1968)
The Swords of Lankhmar (1968)
Swords and Ice Magic (1977)
Bazaar of the Bizarre (1978)
The Knight and Knave of Swords (1988)
Swords Against the Shadowland (Robin Wayne Bailey) (1998)
Night's Black Agents (1947)
The Best of Fritz Leiber (1974)
The Book of Fritz Leiber (1974)
The Second Book of Fritz Leiber (1975)
Heroes and Horrors (1978)
"Coming Attraction" (1950)
"A Pail of Air" (1951)
"The Moon is Green" (1952)
"The Unholy Grail" (1962)
"Bazaar of the Bizarre" (1963)
"To Arkham and the Stars" (1966)
"Gonna Roll the Bones" (1967)
"Ill Met in Lankhmar" (1970)
"The Snow Women" (1970)
"Midnight by the Morphy Watch" (1974)
"Belsen Express" (1975)
"Catch That Zeppelin!" (1975)
"The Terror from the Depths" (1976)
Weird Woman (1944)
Night of the Eagle (1962)
Witches' Brew (1980)
The Girl with the Hungry Eyes (1995)
Bibliography
Fritz Leiber, Sr. (father)
v
t
e
The Sword in the Stone by T. H. White (1939)
Slan by A. E. van Vogt (1941)
Beyond This Horizon by Anson MacDonald (1943)
Conjure Wife by Fritz Leiber (1944)
Shadow Over Mars by Leigh Brackett (1945)
The Mule by Isaac Asimov (1946)
Farmer in the Sky by Robert A. Heinlein (1951)
Fahrenheit 451 by Ray Bradbury (1954)
The Demolished Man by Alfred Bester (1953)
They'd Rather Be Right (aka: The Forever Machine) by Mark Clifton and Frank Riley (1955)
Double Star by Robert A. Heinlein (1956)
The Big Time by Fritz Leiber (1958)
A Case of Conscience by James Blish (1959)
Starship Troopers by Robert A. Heinlein (1960)
A Canticle for Leibowitz by Walter M. Miller, Jr. (1961)
Stranger in a Strange Land by Robert A. Heinlein (1962)
The Man in the High Castle by Philip K. Dick (1963)
Here Gather the Stars (aka: Way Station) by Clifford D. Simak (1964)
The Wanderer by Fritz Leiber (1965)
Dune by Frank Herbert / ...And Call Me Conrad (aka: This Immortal) by Roger Zelazny (1966)
The Moon Is a Harsh Mistress by Robert A. Heinlein (1967)
Lord of Light by Roger Zelazny (1968)
Stand on Zanzibar by John Brunner (1969)
The Left Hand of Darkness by Ursula K. Le Guin (1970)
Ringworld by Larry Niven (1971)
To Your Scattered Bodies Go by Philip José Farmer (1972)
The Gods Themselves by Isaac Asimov (1973)
Rendezvous with Rama by Arthur C. Clarke (1974)
The Dispossessed by Ursula K. Le Guin (1975)
The Forever War by Joe Haldeman (1976)
Where Late the Sweet Birds Sang by Kate Wilhelm (1977)
Gateway by Frederik Pohl (1978)
Dreamsnake by Vonda N. McIntyre (1979)
The Fountains of Paradise by Arthur C. Clarke (1980)
The Snow Queen by Joan D. Vinge (1981)
Downbelow Station by C. J. Cherryh (1982)
Foundation's Edge by Isaac Asimov (1983)
Startide Rising by David Brin (1984)
Neuromancer by William Gibson (1985)
Ender's Game by Orson Scott Card (1986)
Speaker for the Dead by Orson Scott Card (1987)
The Uplift War by David Brin (1988)
Cyteen by C. J. Cherryh (1989)
Hyperion by Dan Simmons (1990)
The Vor Game by Lois McMaster Bujold (1991)
Barrayar by Lois McMaster Bujold (1992)
A Fire Upon the Deep by Vernor Vinge / Doomsday Book by Connie Willis (1993)
Green Mars by Kim Stanley Robinson (1994)
Mirror Dance by Lois McMaster Bujold (1995)
The Diamond Age by Neal Stephenson (1996)
Blue Mars by Kim Stanley Robinson (1997)
Forever Peace by Joe Haldeman (1998)
To Say Nothing of the Dog by Connie Willis (1999)
A Deepness in the Sky by Vernor Vinge (2000)
Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire by J. K. Rowling (2001)
American Gods by Neil Gaiman (2002)
Hominids by Robert J. Sawyer (2003)
Paladin of Souls by Lois McMaster Bujold (2004)
Jonathan Strange & Mr Norrell by Susanna Clarke (2005)
Spin by Robert Charles Wilson (2006)
Rainbows End by Vernor Vinge (2007)
The Yiddish Policemen's Union by Michael Chabon (2008)
The Graveyard Book by Neil Gaiman (2009)
The Windup Girl by Paolo Bacigalupi / The City & the City by China Miéville (2010)
Blackout/All Clear by Connie Willis (2011)
Among Others by Jo Walton (2012)
Redshirts by John Scalzi (2013)
Ancillary Justice by Ann Leckie (2014)
The Three-Body Problem by Cixin Liu, translated by Ken Liu (2015)
The Fifth Season by N. K. Jemisin (2016)
The Obelisk Gate by N. K. Jemisin (2017)
The Stone Sky by N. K. Jemisin (2018)
The Calculating Stars by Mary Robinette Kowal (2019)
A Memory Called Empire by Arkady Martine (2020)
Network Effect by Martha Wells (2021)
A Desolation Called Peace by Arkady Martine (2022)
Nettle & Bone by T. Kingfisher (2023)
Some Desperate Glory by Emily Tesh (2024)


URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Norstrilia
Content:

Norstrilia is a science fiction novel by American writer Paul Linebarger, published under the pseudonym Cordwainer Smith. The novel takes place in the universe of Smith's Instrumentality of Mankind. It was heavily influenced by the classic Chinese novel Journey to the West.[citation needed] Norstrilia is in part a sequel to Smith's 1962 short story "The Ballad of Lost C'Mell", which features some of the same characters and settings. The novel was first published as a single book in 1975, after appearing earlier as two short novels in 1964 and 1968.


## Plot
The immensely wealthy planet Old North Australia ("Norstrilia") is the only place in the universe which produces the precious immortality drug "stroon". The Norstrilians cull their young in order to prevent overpopulation, and only those who pass the test of the "Garden of Death" are allowed to enter adulthood.
Rod McBan is the last male descendant of one of the oldest Norstrilian families and the heir to one of the best ranches, the Station of Doom. As such, he has been spared the culling three times, though he is considered unfit, as his ability to communicate telepathically with other Norstrilians is erratic. After his last test, which he finally passes with the aid of a Lord of the Instrumentality and his own talents, he learns that an envious former friend, who suffers from an allergy to stroon and so is condemned to live a mere 150 years, seeks to kill him, using the pretext that the test was biased and administered unfairly.
Rod survives one assassination attempt. To escape the danger, he amasses an immense fortune overnight by playing the futures market in stroon, following a plan formulated by his ancient computer which was passed down to him by an eccentric ancestor. By the next day, he is the wealthiest person in history. The Instrumentality changes the rules so it cannot happen again, but allow McBain to keep his money to see what he will do with it.
For his safety, Rod is sent to Earth, where his fortune makes him a magnet for all manner of criminals and revolutionaries. After a series of adventures among the "underpeople" (an underclass of animals modified to resemble humans) with the Cat-woman C'mell, he meets their leader, E'Telekeli. In exchange for most of Rod's fortune, to be used to campaign for the underpeople, E'Telekeli and Lord Jestocost, a Lord of the Instrumentality sympathetic to the cause, send Rod back to Norstrilia after fixing his telepathic disability and providing a psychological remedy for Rod's enemy.


## Publication history
Norstrilia was first published as two short novels. The first part appeared as The Planet Buyer in 1964, after a shorter version was published in Galaxy magazine as the novelette "The Boy Who Bought Old Earth".
The second part was published in shorter form, also in 1964, in Galaxy's sister magazine If as "The Store of Heart's Desire"; the story was later published as The Underpeople in 1968, after Smith's death.
The novel was first published in one volume in a 1975 paperback released by Ballantine Books.
In 1994 NESFA Press published the first hardcover edition, adding further revisions and corrections to the text, and including variant texts in an appendix.
The 1994 text appears, without the appendix, in the Baen Books omnibus We, the Underpeople (2008), along with "The Ballad of Lost C'Mell" and four other related stories.


## Reception
Algis Budrys of Galaxy Science Fiction magazine reviewed The Planet Buyer, the first half of Norstrilia, favorably; he cited Smith's stylistic ingenuity and described Smith's science fiction stories as "tesserae in a mosaic".[1] The Planet Buyer was nominated for the 1965 Hugo Award for Best Novel.


## References
^ Budrys, Algis; Pohl, Frederik (April 1965). "Galaxy Bookshelf". Galaxy Science Fiction. pp. 137–145.


## Sources
Norstrilia, 1975. Cordwainer Smith, Ballantine Books, ISBN 0-345-24366-8
Norstrilia, 1995. Cordwainer Smith, NESFA Press, ISBN 0-915368-61-7
We the Underpeople, 2006. Cordwainer Smith, Baen Books, ISBN 1-4165-2095-3


## External links
Norstrilia title listing at the Internet Speculative Fiction Database


URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dr._Bloodmoney
Content:

Dr. Bloodmoney, or How We Got Along After the Bomb is a 1965 science fiction novel by American writer Philip K. Dick. It was nominated for the Nebula Award for Best Novel in 1965.[1]
Dick wrote the novel in 1963 with working titles In Earth's Diurnal Course and A Terran Odyssey. Ace editor Donald Wollheim, however, suggested the final title which references the film Dr. Strangelove or: How I Learned to Stop Worrying and Love the Bomb (1964).[2]


## Plot summary
Dr. Bloodmoney is set in a post-apocalyptic future. In 1972, before the start of the narrative, Dr. Bruno Bluthgeld (German for "Blood-Money") had led a project testing nuclear weapons as a protectionary measure against Communist China and the Soviet Union. However, a miscalculation caused an atmospheric nuclear accident leading to widespread fallout and mutations. More recently the United States has been involved in a prolonged period of hostilities with China and the Soviet Union erupting in a war in Cuba.
In 1981, the now universally hated Bluthgeld seeks psychotherapy with Dr. Stockstill for his paranoia and guilt. Meanwhile, Stuart McConchie, Hoppy Harrington and Jim Fergesson, employees at Modern TV Sales and Service in Berkeley, California, go through a fairly typical day, pausing to watch Walt and Lydia Dangerfield being launched into orbit in the first stage of a colonization mission to Mars. This ordinary day, however, is disrupted by a massive nuclear strike. Orbiting overhead, Walt Dangerfield witnesses the tragic events as they unfold, while other characters are reduced to desperate measures in their struggle for survival. Fergesson is killed as his shop collapses. Meanwhile, Bluthgeld is convinced that he caused the strike in response to a universal conspiracy against him. Believing that he has shown the world his power, he sets out to heal and restore order through his imagined magical powers.
The narrative jumps to 1988, when many communities have begun to rebuild a sort of order. A military government has arisen in Cheyenne, Wyoming, while in California government is by local community councils that view one another with varying degrees of hostility. Most pre-war technologies and amenities have been lost. Oil shortages result in disabled cars being pulled by horses or fitted with wood-burning (steam) engines. Former California ranch territory has been converted into agricultural land for corn and other crops. Human mutants have become more common, such as phocomeli, as well as conjoined symbiotes. At the same time, former domestic animals like dogs and cats have undergone mutations that have greatly enhanced their intelligence. Many of these former pets and zoo specimens have allied themselves into ferocious tribal units of their own. Bruno Bluthgeld's dog Terry is capable of imitating simple human speech, while some species of felines may have developed their own evolved languages.
Walt Dangerfield, equipped with enough rations to last for several more years, along with an extensive collection of books and musical recordings, has become an orbiting disc jockey. His broadcasts offer a semblance of continuity with pre-war civilization to the isolated settlements of the postwar world. His wife, Lydia, committed suicide during the intervening period. Now, Dangerfield is showing symptoms of an unknown medical condition, causing concern among some of his listeners.
In Marin County survivors including Bonny Keller, Dr. Stockstill, June Raub and Hoppy Harrington have organized into a self-governing community. Harrington, a Thalidomide baby missing all four of his limbs, harbors a quietly smoldering resentment of the patronizing and condescending attitudes he endured before the war. He has now become a successful mechanic thanks to electronic servo-mechanism technology as well as his gradually increasing abilities of psychokinesis or mind-over-matter. As such, he becomes a genuinely respected and absolutely indispensable member of the community. His ultimate goal, however, is to dominate and humiliate the people within his community through intimidation via his increasingly capricious and violent misuse of his ever-strengthening powers. He has been using his talents to gradually weaken Walt Dangerfield in order to take over Dangerfield's much-beloved satellite transmissions. Meanwhile, Bluthgeld, under the assumed name of Jack Tree, lives as a sheep farmer outside the community. One outsider searching for the infamous Bluthgeld was exposed by Bonny Keller and summarily executed for his troubles.
Stuart McConchie has become a travelling entrepreneur in the post-apocalyptic world, selling "smart" robotic rat traps for a company based in post-war Berkeley. Still holding onto his ambitious pre-war salesman's mentality, McConchie travels to Marin County to meet Andrew Gill, a cigarette and alcohol entrepreneur, to discuss the re-introduction of automation within his factory as an agent of Berkeley-based business interests. His appearance in West Marin startles Hoppy Harrington and Bruno Bluthgeld, both of whom had last seen McConchie on the day of the "Emergency".
Bluthgeld's increasing psychosis eventually leads to the discovery of his identity. His magical powers, however, do not appear to be entirely imaginary. In his ardent desire to silence the talking satellite he seems to initiate another series of atmospheric explosions merely by willing them to occur. Hoppy, viewing him as a potential rival as well as a direct threat to the community and the planet itself, kills him from several miles away. Harrington employs his own psychokinetic powers in flinging the mad scientist high into the air and then simply letting him fall back to the ground. The Marin County council decides to thank Hoppy by presenting him with gifts of Gill's tobacco, alcohol and a monument in Harrington's honor, but Hoppy scorns these gifts as being much less than he deserves. Bonny Keller begins to worry that Hoppy will set himself up as a vindictive little tin god, and so she flees the county with Gill and McConchie in hopes of eventually settling beyond the reach of his powers.
Meanwhile, Edie Keller's conjoined twin brother Bill, a sentient fetus within her body, has been yearning for an independent existence. Bill Keller is able to communicate telepathically with the dead, and they warn him how dangerous Hoppy is becoming. When Edie approaches Hoppy's house, Harrington uses his powers to draw Bill outside of her in hopes of causing him to perish. Little Bill has a near-lethal adventure inside of an owl before finally engineering a body-swap with Hoppy which quickly proves fatal to Harrington. The idol with feet of clay has finally been toppled.
At the conclusion of the book, Dr. Stockstill begins a course of psychotherapy, broadcast over the radio, with Walt Dangerfield, who seems to be slowly recovering from his illness in the absence of a jealous Hoppy Harrington's debilitating mental emanations.


## Characters
Hoppy Harrington A phocomelus with psychokinetic powers and the ability to perfectly imitate voices. Having faced discrimination before the war, Hoppy seeks power and respect through his work as a mechanic and his plot to replace Walt Dangerfield. In an afterword to the 1980 Dell paperback edition, Dick noted, "It is not so much that Hoppy is evil but that his power is evil... [he] epitomizes the monster in us: the person who is hungry... for coercive control over others... It is compensation for what he lacked from birth. Hoppy is incomplete, and he will complete himself at the expense of the entire world."[3]
Bruno Bluthgeld aka Jack Tree, aka Dr. Bloodmoney. An atomic physicist, Bluthgeld's miscalculations caused the pre-war Emergency and made him the object of worldwide hatred. He goes into hiding as sheep farmer Jack Tree. Bluthgeld is subject to paranoia, magical thinking, and megalomania; he may or may not actually have magical powers. Dick said of the character, "I have to confess to an overly simple view of Doctor Bluthgeld: I hate him and I hate everything he stands for... I cannot fathom his mind; I cannot understand his hates. It is not the Russians I fear; it is the Doctor Bluthgelds, the Doctor Bloodmoneys, in our own society, that terrify me... [He] is sick, and sick in a way that is dangerous to the rest of us."[3]
Walter Dangerfield Slated to be the first colonist of Mars, Dangerfield was orbiting the Earth in a satellite waiting for his final rocket firing when the nuclear war occurred. Stuck in orbit, Dangerfield becomes a popular disc jockey. His wife Lydia had committed suicide shortly after the outbreak of war. Dick said of the character, "[he] is transformed from a man assisting the fragmented postwar society, giving it unity and strength, raising its morale, to a man desperate for help from it... He signifies isolation, which is the horror of the many down below: isolation and a loss of the objects and values that comprised their original world."[3]
Bonny Keller A friend and former colleague of Bluthgeld, Bonny attempts to protect him when he goes into hiding. She has affairs with numerous men including Hal Barnes and Andrew Gill.
Stuart McConchie An African-American salesman, Stuart moves from selling television sets before the war to selling automated traps to kill mutant animals after the war. He expresses disgust for Hoppy Harrington and all "unnatural" results of the Emergency's nuclear fallout. His optimistic personality and salesmanship remain largely unchanged by the post-apocalyptic environment. Dick stated Stuart was his favorite character in the novel and the one whom he most identified with, and whose immediate perception of Bluthgeld as insane is more insightful than Bonny's view of the man, despite the latter's being formed from extensive personal knowledge.[3]
Edie Keller Daughter of Bonny Keller and Andrew Gill. Edie tells everyone she has a twin brother, assumed by everyone to be an imaginary friend but really being a sentient fetus in fetu named Bill.
Bill Keller Edie's brother, a fetus in fetu within her body. He depends on Edie for sustenance and for reports of her sense perceptions, but independently has telepathic contact with the dead.
Andrew Gill A tobacco and alcohol merchant, he has a chance sexual encounter with Bonny Keller immediately after the nuclear strike, during which Edie Keller is conceived. In love with Bonny, Gill chooses to remain in West Marin, manufacturing ersatz tobacco and liquor.
Eldon Blaine An eyeglasses salesman who attempts first to kidnap Hoppy Harrington, and later to steal Hoppy's radio, for his own community. He is murdered by Hoppy.
Dr. Stockstill A psychiatrist before the war, Stockstill later becomes a general practitioner. He attempts to treat Bluthgeld and Dangerfield.
Mr. Austurias The West Marin school teacher, and an avid mushroom collector. He is killed for prying into Jack Tree's identity.
Jim Fergesson Owner of Modern TV Sales and Service, Fergesson is committed to non-discriminatory hiring practices, and consequently hires Stuart McConchie and Hoppy Harrington. He dies instantly during the nuclear strike.
June Raub A community leader of West Marin, who relishes the opportunity the war provides her for proving her worth.
Hal Barnes Mr. Austurias' replacement as West Marin schoolteacher, Barnes has an affair with Bonny Keller, who comes to view him as a coward.


## Other versions
Dick assembled excerpts from Dr. Bloodmoney into a short story in 1964. This version, titled A Terran Odyssey, was first published in volume five of The Collected Stories of Philip K. Dick in 1987.


## References
^ "1965 Award Winners & Nominees". Worlds Without End. Retrieved September 27, 2009.
^ Lethem, Jonathan. "Notes on the Text." Five Novels of the 1960s and 70s, by Philip K. Dick. New York: Library of America, 2008, pp. 1117. ISBN 978-1-59853-025-4
^ a b c d Dick, Philip K. (1980). Dr. Bloodmoney, or: How We Got Along After the Bomb (1980 Paperback ed.). Dell. pp. 299–304. ISBN 0-440-11489-6.


## Sources
Briasco, Luca, (2006). "«Early in the bright sun-yellowed morning»: Cronache del dopobomba tra mainstream e genere", Trasmigrazioni eds. De Angelis and Rossi, Firenze: Le Monnier, 2006, pp. 188–95.
Butler, Andrew, (2007). The Pocket Essential Philip K.Dick: Harpenden: Pocket Essentials: ISBN 1-903047-29-3
Jameson, Fredric, (1975). "After Armageddon: Character Systems in Dr Bloodmoney", Science-Fiction Studies #5, 2:1, pp. 31–42.
Rossi, Umberto (2009). "Acousmatic Presences: From DJs to Talk-Radio Hosts in American Fiction, Cinema, and Drama", Mosaic, 42:1, March, pp. 83–98.
Spinrad, Norman, (1977). "Introduction", in Philip K. Dick, Dr. Bloodmoney, or How We Got Along After the Bomb, Boston: Gregg Press.


## External links
Dr. Bloodmoney cover art gallery
Dr. Bloodmoney at Worlds Without End
v
t
e
Bibliography
Lost works
Gather Yourselves Together (1950)
Voices from the Street (1952)
Solar Lottery (1954)
Mary and the Giant (1954)
The World Jones Made (1954)
Eye in the Sky (1955)
The Man Who Japed (1955)
A Time for George Stavros (1956)
Pilgrim on the Hill (1956)
The Broken Bubble (1956)
The Cosmic Puppets (1957)
Puttering About in a Small Land (1957)
Nicholas and the Higs (1958)
Time Out of Joint (1958)
In Milton Lumky Territory (1958)
Confessions of a Crap Artist (1959)
The Man Whose Teeth Were All Exactly Alike (1960)
Humpty Dumpty in Oakland (1960)
Vulcan's Hammer (1960)
Dr. Futurity (1960)
The Man in the High Castle (1961)
We Can Build You (1962)
Martian Time-Slip (1962)
Dr. Bloodmoney, or How We Got Along After the Bomb (1963)
The Game-Players of Titan (1963)
The Simulacra (1963)
The Crack in Space (1963)
Clans of the Alphane Moon (1964)
The Three Stigmata of Palmer Eldritch (1964)
The Zap Gun (1964)
The Penultimate Truth (1964)
The Unteleported Man (1964)
The Ganymede Takeover (1965)
Counter-Clock World (1965)
Do Androids Dream of Electric Sheep? (1966)
Nick and the Glimmung (1966)
Now Wait for Last Year (1966)
Ubik (1966)
Galactic Pot-Healer (1968)
A Maze of Death (1968)
Our Friends from Frolix 8 (1969)
Flow My Tears, the Policeman Said (1974)
Deus Irae (1976)
Radio Free Albemuth (1976; published 1985)
A Scanner Darkly (1977)
Valis (1981)
The Divine Invasion (1981)
The Transmigration of Timothy Archer (1982)
The Owl in Daylight (unfinished)
A Handful of Darkness (1955)
The Variable Man (1956)
The Preserving Machine (1969)
The Book of Philip K. Dick (1973)
The Best of Philip K. Dick (1977)
The Golden Man (1980)
Robots, Androids, and Mechanical Oddities (1984)
I Hope I Shall Arrive Soon (1985)
The Collected Stories of Philip K. Dick (1987)
Beyond Lies the Wub (1988)
The Dark Haired Girl (1989)
The Father-Thing (1989)
Second Variety (1989)
The Days of Perky Pat (1990)
The Little Black Box (1990)
The Short Happy Life of the Brown Oxford (1990)
We Can Remember It for You Wholesale (1990)
The Minority Report (1991)
Second Variety (1991)
The Eye of the Sibyl (1992)
The Philip K. Dick Reader (1997)
Minority Report (2002)
Selected Stories of Philip K. Dick (2002)
Paycheck (2004)
Vintage PKD (2006)
The Exegesis of Philip K. Dick (2011)
"Beyond Lies the Wub" (1952)
"The Gun" (1952)
"The Skull" (1952)
"The Little Movement" (1952)
"The Defenders" (1953)
"Mr. Spaceship" (1953)
"Piper in the Woods" (1953)
"Roog" (1953)
"The Infinites" (1953)
"Second Variety" (1953)
"Colony" (1953)
"The Cookie Lady" (1953)
"Impostor" (1953)
"Paycheck" (1953)
"The Preserving Machine" (1953)
"Expendable" (1953)
"The Indefatigable Frog" (1953)
"The Commuter" (1953)
"Out in the Garden" (1953)
"The Great C" (1953)
"The King of the Elves" (1953)
"The Trouble with Bubbles" (1953)
"The Variable Man" (1953)
"The Impossible Planet" (1953)
"Planet for Transients" (1953)
"The Builder" (1953)
"Tony and the Beetles" (1953)
"The Hanging Stranger" (1953)
"Prize Ship" (1954)
"Beyond the Door" (1954)
"The Crystal Crypt" (1954)
"The Short Happy Life of the Brown Oxford" (1954)
"The Golden Man" (1954)
"Sales Pitch" (1954)
"Breakfast at Twilight" (1954)
"The Crawlers" (1954)
"Exhibit Piece" (1954)
"Adjustment Team" (1954)
"Shell Game" (1954)
"Meddler" (1954)
"A World of Talent" (1954)
"The Last of the Masters" (1954)
"Upon the Dull Earth" (1954)
"The Father-thing" (1954)
"Strange Eden" (1954)
"The Turning Wheel" (1954)
"Foster, You're Dead!" (1955)
"Human Is" (1955)
"War Veteran" (1955)
"Captive Market" (1955)
"Nanny" (1955)
"The Chromium Fence" (1955)
"Service Call" (1955)
"The Mold of Yancy" (1955)
"Autofac" (1955)
"Psi-man Heal My Child!" (1955)
"The Hood Maker" (1955)
"The Minority Report" (1956)
"Pay for the Printer" (1956)
"A Glass of Darkness (The Cosmic Puppets)" (1956)
"The Unreconstructed M" (1957)
"Null-O" (1958)
"Explorers We" (1959)
"Recall Mechanism" (1959)
"Fair Game" (1959)
"War Game" (1959)
"All We Marsmen" (1963)
"What'll We Do with Ragland Park?" (1963)
"The Days of Perky Pat" (1963)
"If There Were No Benny Cemoli" (1963)
"Waterspider" (1964)
"Novelty Act" (1964)
"Oh, to Be a Blobel!" (1964)
"The War with the Fnools" (1964)
"What the Dead Men Say" (1964)
"Orpheus with Clay Feet" (1964)
"Cantata 140" (1964)
"The Unteleported Man" (1964)
"The Little Black Box" (1964)
"Retreat Syndrome" (1965)
"Project Plowshare (later "The Zap Gun")" (1965)
"We Can Remember It for You Wholesale" (1966)
"Holy Quarrel" (1966)
"Faith of Our Fathers" (1967)
"Not by Its Cover" (1968)
"The Electric Ant" (1969)
"A. Lincoln, Simulacrum" (1969)
"The Pre-persons" (1974)
"A Little Something for Us Tempunauts" (1974)
"The Exit Door Leads In" (1979)
"Rautavaara's Case" (1980)
"I Hope I Shall Arrive Soon" (1980)
"The Eye of the Sibyl" (1987)
"Stability" (1987)
"The Android and the Human" (1972)
"If You Find This World Bad, You Should See Some of the Others" (1977)
Blade Runner (1982)
Total Recall (1990)
Barjo (1992)
Screamers (1995)
Impostor (2001)
Minority Report (2002)
Paycheck (2003)
A Scanner Darkly (2006)
Next (2007)
Screamers: The Hunting (2009)
Radio Free Albemuth (2010)
The Adjustment Bureau (2011)
Total Recall (2012)
Blade Runner 2049 (2017)
2036: Nexus Dawn (2017)
2048: Nowhere to Run (2017)
Blade Runner Black Out 2022 (2017)
Total Recall 2070 (1999)
The Man in the High Castle (2015–2019)
Minority Report (2015)
Electric Dreams (2017–2018)
Blade Runner: Black Lotus (2021–2022)
Blade Runner 2099 (upcoming)
Blade Runner franchise
Only Apparently Real (1986 biography)
I Am Alive and You Are Dead (1993 biography)
Your Name Here (2008 drama film)
Isa Dick Hackett (daughter)
Philip K. Dick Award
Category


URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dune_(novel)
Content:

Dune is a 1965 epic science fiction novel by American author Frank Herbert, originally published as two separate serials (1963–64 novel Dune World and 1965 novel Prophet of Dune) in Analog magazine. It tied with Roger Zelazny's This Immortal for the Hugo Award for Best Novel and won the inaugural Nebula Award for Best Novel in 1966. It is the first installment of the Dune Chronicles. It is one of the world's best-selling science fiction novels.[3]
Dune is set in the distant future in a feudal interstellar society, descended from terrestrial humans, in which various noble houses control planetary fiefs. It tells the story of young Paul Atreides, whose family reluctantly accepts the stewardship of the planet Arrakis. While the planet is an inhospitable and sparsely populated desert wasteland, it is the only source of melange or "spice", an enormously valuable drug that extends life and enhances mental abilities. Melange is also necessary for space navigation, which requires a kind of multidimensional awareness and foresight that only the drug provides. As melange can only be produced on Arrakis, control of the planet is a coveted and dangerous undertaking. The story explores the multilayered interactions of politics, religion, ecology, technology, and human emotion as the factions of the empire confront each other in a struggle for the control of Arrakis and its spice.
Herbert wrote five sequels: Dune Messiah, Children of Dune, God Emperor of Dune, Heretics of Dune, and Chapterhouse: Dune. Following Herbert's death in 1986, his son Brian Herbert and author Kevin J. Anderson continued the series in over a dozen additional novels since 1999.
Adaptations of the novel to cinema have been notoriously difficult and complicated. In the 1970s, cult filmmaker Alejandro Jodorowsky attempted to make a film based on the novel. After three years of development, the project was canceled due to a constantly growing budget. In 1984, a film adaptation directed by David Lynch was released to mostly negative responses from critics and failure at the box office, although it later developed a cult following. The book was also adapted into the 2000 Sci-Fi Channel miniseries Frank Herbert's Dune and its 2003 sequel, Frank Herbert's Children of Dune (the latter of which combines the events of Dune Messiah and Children of Dune). A second film adaptation, directed by Denis Villeneuve, was released on October 21, 2021, to positive reviews. It went on to be nominated for ten Academy Awards, including Best Picture, ultimately winning six. Villeneuve's film covers roughly the first half of the original novel; a sequel, which covers the second half, was released on March 1, 2024, to critical acclaim. Both films have grossed over $1 billion worldwide.
The series has also been used as the basis for several board, role-playing, and video games.
Since 2009, the names of planets from the Dune novels have been adopted for the real-life nomenclature of plains and other features on Saturn's moon Titan.


## Origins
After his novel The Dragon in the Sea was published in 1957, Herbert traveled to Florence, Oregon, at the north end of the Oregon Dunes. Here, the United States Department of Agriculture was attempting to use poverty grasses to stabilize the sand dunes. Herbert claimed in a letter to his literary agent, Lurton Blassingame, that the moving dunes could "swallow whole cities, lakes, rivers, highways."[4] Herbert's article on the dunes, "They Stopped the Moving Sands", was never completed (and only published decades later in The Road to Dune), but its research sparked Herbert's interest in ecology and deserts.[5]
Herbert further drew inspiration from Native American mentors like "Indian Henry" (as Herbert referred to the man to his son; likely a Henry Martin of the Hoh tribe) and Howard Hansen. Both Martin and Hansen grew up on the Quileute reservation near Herbert's hometown. According to historian Daniel Immerwahr, Hansen regularly shared his writing with Herbert. "White men are eating the earth," Hansen told Herbert in 1958, after sharing a piece on the effect of logging on the Quileute reservation. "They're gonna turn this whole planet into a wasteland, just like North Africa." The world could become a "big dune," Herbert responded in agreement.[6]
Herbert was also interested in the idea of the superhero mystique and messiahs. He believed that feudalism was a natural condition humans fell into, where some led and others gave up the responsibility of making decisions and just followed orders. He found that desert environments have historically given birth to several major religions with messianic impulses. He decided to join his interests together so he could play religious and ecological ideas against each other. In addition, he was influenced by the story of T. E. Lawrence and the "messianic overtones" in Lawrence's involvement in the Arab Revolt during World War I. In an early version of Dune, the hero was actually very similar to Lawrence of Arabia, but Herbert decided the plot was too straightforward and added more layers to his story.[7]
Herbert drew heavy inspiration also from Lesley Blanch's The Sabres of Paradise (1960), a narrative history recounting a mid-19th-century conflict in the Caucasus between rugged caucasian Muslim tribes and the expanding Russian Empire.[8] Language used on both sides of that conflict become terms in Herbert's world—chakobsa, a Caucasian hunting language, becomes a battle language of humans spread across the galaxy; kanly, a word for blood feud in the 19th-century Caucasus, represents a feud between Dune's noble Houses; sietch and tabir are both words for camp borrowed from Ukrainian Cossacks (of the Pontic–Caspian steppe).[8]
Herbert also borrowed some lines which Blanch stated were Caucasian proverbs. "To kill with the point lacked artistry", used by Blanch to describe the Caucasus peoples' love of swordsmanship, becomes in Dune "Killing with the tip lacks artistry", a piece of advice given to a young Paul during his training. "Polish comes from the city, wisdom from the hills", a Caucasian aphorism, turns into a desert expression: "Polish comes from the cities, wisdom from the desert".[8]
Another significant source of inspiration for Dune was Herbert's experiences with psilocybin and his hobby of cultivating mushrooms, according to mycologist Paul Stamets's account of meeting Herbert in the 1980s:[9]
Frank went on to tell me that much of the premise of Dune—the magic spice (spores) that allowed the bending of space (tripping), the giant sand worms (maggots digesting mushrooms), the eyes of the Freman (the cerulean blue of Psilocybe mushrooms), the mysticism of the female spiritual warriors, the Bene Gesserits (influenced by the tales of Maria Sabina and the sacred mushroom cults of Mexico)—came from his perception of the fungal life cycle, and his imagination was stimulated through his experiences with the use of magic mushrooms.
Herbert spent the next five years researching, writing, and revising. He published a three-part serial Dune World in the monthly Analog, from December 1963 to February 1964. The serial was accompanied by several illustrations that were not published again. After an interval of a year, he published the much slower-paced five-part The Prophet of Dune in the January–May 1965 issues.[10][11] The first serial became "Book One: Dune" in the final published Dune novel, and the second serial was divided into "Book Two: Muad'dib" and "Book Three: The Prophet". The serialized version was expanded, reworked, and submitted to more than twenty publishers, each of whom rejected it. The novel, Dune, was finally accepted and published in August 1965 by Chilton Books, a printing house better known for publishing auto repair manuals.[12] Sterling Lanier, an editor at Chilton, had seen Herbert's manuscript and had urged his company to take a risk in publishing the book. However, the first printing, priced at $5.95 (equivalent to $59.37 in 2024), did not sell well and was poorly received by critics as being atypical of science fiction at the time. Chilton considered the publication of Dune a write-off and Lanier was fired.[13] Over the course of time, the book gained critical acclaim, and its popularity spread by word-of-mouth to allow Herbert to start working full time on developing the sequels to Dune, elements of which were already written alongside Dune.[14]
At first Herbert considered using Mars as setting for his novel, but eventually decided to use a fictional planet instead. His son Brian said that "Readers would have too many preconceived ideas about that planet, due to the number of stories that had been written about it."[15]
Herbert dedicated his work "to the people whose labors go beyond ideas into the realm of 'real materials'—to the dry-land ecologists, wherever they may be, in whatever time they work, this effort at prediction is dedicated in humility and admiration."[16]


## Plot
Duke Leto Atreides of House Atreides, ruler of the ocean world Caladan, is assigned by the Padishah Emperor Shaddam IV to serve as fief ruler of the planet Arrakis. Although Arrakis is a harsh and inhospitable desert planet, it is of enormous importance because it is the only planetary source of melange, or the "spice", a unique and incredibly valuable substance that extends human youth, vitality and lifespan. It is also through the consumption of spice that Spacing Guild Navigators are able to effect safe interstellar travel through a limited ability to see into the future. The Emperor is jealous of the Duke's rising popularity in the Landsraad, the council of Great Houses, and sees House Atreides as a potential rival and threat. He conspires with House Harkonnen, the former stewards of Arrakis and the longstanding enemies of the Atreides, to destroy Leto and his family after their arrival. Leto is aware his assignment is a trap of some kind, but is compelled to obey the Emperor's orders anyway.
Leto's concubine Lady Jessica is an acolyte of the Bene Gesserit, an exclusively female group that pursues mysterious political aims and wields seemingly superhuman physical and mental abilities, such as the ability to control their bodies down to the cellular level, and also decide the sex of their children. Though Jessica was instructed by the Bene Gesserit to bear a daughter as part of their breeding program, out of love for Leto she bore him a son, Paul. From a young age, Paul is trained in warfare by Leto's aides, the elite soldiers Duncan Idaho and Gurney Halleck. Thufir Hawat, the Duke's Mentat (human computers, able to store vast amounts of data and perform advanced calculations on demand), has instructed Paul in the ways of political intrigue. Jessica has also trained her son in Bene Gesserit disciplines.
Paul's prophetic dreams interest Jessica's superior, the Reverend Mother Gaius Helen Mohiam. She subjects Paul to a deadly test. She holds a poisoned needle, the gom jabbar, to his neck, ready to strike should he withdraw his hand from a box which creates extreme pain by nerve induction but causes no physical damage. This is to test Paul's ability to endure the pain and override his animal instincts, proving that he is, in Bene Gesserit eyes, human. Paul passes, enduring greater pain than any woman has ever been subjected to in the test.
Paul and his parents travel with their household to occupy Arrakeen, the capital on Arrakis. Leto learns of the dangers involved in harvesting the spice, which is protected by giant sandworms, and seeks to negotiate with the planet's indigenous Fremen people, seeing them as a valuable ally rather than foes. Soon after the Atreides' arrival, Harkonnen forces attack, joined by the Emperor's ferocious Sardaukar troops in disguise. Leto is betrayed by his personal physician, the Suk doctor Wellington Yueh, who delivers a drugged Leto to the Baron Vladimir Harkonnen and his twisted Mentat, Piter De Vries.
Yueh, who delivered Leto under duress, arranges for Jessica and Paul to escape into the desert. Duncan is killed helping them flee, and they are subsequently presumed dead in a sandstorm by the Harkonnens. Yueh replaces one of Leto's teeth with a poison gas capsule, hoping Leto can kill Baron Harkonnen during their encounter. Piter kills Yueh, and the Baron narrowly avoids the gas (due to his defensive shield), which kills Leto, Piter, and the others in the room. The Baron forces Thufir to take over Piter's position by dosing him with a long-lasting, fatal poison and threatening to withhold the regular antidote doses. While he follows the Baron's orders, Thufir works secretly to undermine the Harkonnens.
Having fled into the desert, Paul is exposed to high concentrations of spice and has visions through which he realizes he has significant powers (as a result of the Bene Gesserit breeding scheme). He foresees potential futures in which he lives among the Fremen before leading them on a holy war across the known universe. Paul reveals that Jessica's father is Baron Harkonnen, a secret kept from her by the Bene Gesserit.
Paul and Jessica traverse the desert in search of Fremen people. After being captured by a Fremen band, Paul and Jessica agree to teach the Fremen the Bene Gesserit fighting technique known to the Fremen as the "weirding way" and are accepted into the community of Sietch Tabr. Paul proves his manhood by killing a Fremen man named Jamis in a ritualistic crysknife fight and chooses the Fremen name Muad'Dib, while Jessica opts to undergo a ritual to become a Reverend Mother by drinking and neutralizing the poisonous Water of Life. Pregnant with Leto's daughter, she inadvertently causes her unborn daughter Alia to become infused with the same powers in the womb. Paul takes a Fremen lover, Chani, who bears him a son he names Leto.
Two years pass, and Paul's powerful prescience manifests, which confirms to the Fremen that he is their prophesied "Lisan al-Gaib" messiah, a legend planted by the Bene Gesserit's Missionaria Protectiva. Paul embraces his father's belief that the Fremen could be a powerful fighting force to take back Arrakis, but also sees that if he does not control them, their jihad could consume the entire universe. Word of the new Fremen leader reaches both the Baron and the Emperor as spice production falls due to their increasingly destructive raids. The Baron encourages his brutish nephew Glossu "Beast" Rabban to rule with an iron fist, hoping the contrast with his shrewder nephew Feyd-Rautha will make the latter popular among the people of Arrakis when he eventually replaces Rabban. The Emperor, suspecting the Baron of trying to create troops more powerful than the Sardaukar to seize power, sends spies to Arrakis. Thufir uses the opportunity to sow seeds of doubt in the Baron about the Emperor's true plans, putting further strain on their alliance.
Gurney, who survived the Harkonnen coup and became a smuggler, reunites with Paul and Jessica after a Fremen raid on his harvester. Believing Jessica to be a traitor, Gurney threatens to kill her but is stopped by Paul. Paul did not foresee Gurney's attack and concludes he must increase his prescience by drinking the Water of Life, which is fatal to males. Paul falls into unconsciousness for three weeks after drinking the poison, but when he wakes, he has clairvoyance across time and space: he is the Kwisatz Haderach, the ultimate goal of the Bene Gesserit breeding program.
Paul senses the Emperor and the Baron are amassing fleets around Arrakis to quell the Fremen rebellion, and prepares the Fremen for a major offensive. The Emperor arrives with the Baron on Arrakis. The Sardaukar seize a Fremen outpost, killing many, including young Leto, while Alia is captured and taken to the Emperor. Under cover of an electric storm, which shorts out the Sardaukar's defensive shields, Paul and the Fremen, riding giant sandworms, destroy the capital's natural rock fortifications with atomics and attack, while Alia assassinates the Baron and escapes. The Fremen quickly defeat both the Harkonnen and Sardaukar troops, killing Rabban in the process. Thufir is ordered to assassinate Paul, who gives him the opportunity to take anything that Thufir wishes of him. Thufir chooses to stab himself with the poisoned needle intended for Paul.
Paul faces the Emperor, threatening to destroy spice production forever unless Shaddam abdicates the throne. Feyd-Rautha challenges Paul to a knife fight, during which he cheats and tries to kill Paul with a poison spur in his belt. Paul gains the upper hand and kills him. The Emperor reluctantly cedes the throne to Paul and promises his daughter Princess Irulan's hand in marriage. Paul takes control of the Empire, but realizes that he cannot stop the Fremen jihad, as their belief in him is too powerful to restrain.


## Characters
Paul Atreides, the Duke's son, and main character of the novel
Duke Leto Atreides, head of House Atreides
Lady Jessica, Bene Gesserit and concubine of the Duke, mother of Paul and Alia
Alia Atreides, Paul's younger sister
Thufir Hawat, Mentat and Master of Assassins to House Atreides
Gurney Halleck, staunchly loyal troubadour warrior of the Atreides
Duncan Idaho, Swordmaster for House Atreides, graduate of the Ginaz School
Wellington Yueh, Suk doctor for the Atreides who is secretly working for House Harkonnen
Baron Vladimir Harkonnen, head of House Harkonnen
Piter De Vries, twisted Mentat
Feyd-Rautha, nephew and heir-presumptive of the Baron
Glossu "Beast" Rabban, also called Rabban Harkonnen, older nephew of the Baron
Iakin Nefud, Captain of the Guard
Shaddam IV, Padishah Emperor of the Known Universe (the Imperium)
Princess Irulan, Shaddam's eldest daughter and heir, also a historian
Count Fenring, the Emperor's closest friend, advisor, and "errand boy"
Reverend Mother Gaius Helen Mohiam, Proctor Superior of the Bene Gesserit school and the Emperor's Truthsayer
Lady Margot Fenring, Bene Gesserit wife of Count Fenring
The Fremen, native inhabitants of Arrakis
Stilgar, Fremen leader of Sietch Tabr
Chani, Paul's Fremen concubine and a Sayyadina (female acolyte) of Sietch Tabr
Dr. Liet-Kynes, the Imperial Planetologist on Arrakis and father of Chani, as well as a revered figure among the Fremen
The Shadout Mapes, head housekeeper of imperial residence on Arrakis
Jamis, Fremen killed by Paul in ritual duel
Harah, wife of Jamis and later servant to Paul who helps raise Alia among the Fremen
Reverend Mother Ramallo, religious leader of Sietch Tabr
Esmar Tuek, a powerful smuggler and the father of Staban Tuek
Staban Tuek, the son of Esmar Tuek and a powerful smuggler who befriends and takes in Gurney Halleck and his surviving men after the attack on the Atreides


## Themes and influences
The Dune series is a landmark of science fiction. Herbert deliberately suppressed technology in his Dune universe so he could address the politics of humanity, rather than the future of humanity's technology. For example, a key pre-history event to the novel's present is the "Butlerian Jihad", in which all robots and computers were destroyed, eliminating these common elements to science fiction from the novel as to allow focus on humanity.[14] Dune considers the way humans and their institutions might change over time.[1] Director John Harrison, who adapted Dune for Syfy's 2000 miniseries, called the novel a universal and timeless reflection of "the human condition and its moral dilemmas", and said:
A lot of people refer to Dune as science fiction. I never do. I consider it an epic adventure in the classic storytelling tradition, a story of myth and legend not unlike the Morte d'Arthur or any messiah story. It just happens to be set in the future ... The story is actually more relevant today than when Herbert wrote it. In the 1960s, there were just these two colossal superpowers duking it out. Today we're living in a more feudal, corporatized world more akin to Herbert's universe of separate families, power centers and business interests, all interrelated and kept together by the one commodity necessary to all.[17]
But Dune has also been called a mix of soft and hard science fiction since "the attention to ecology is hard, the anthropology and the psychic abilities are soft."[18] Hard elements include the ecology of Arrakis, suspensor technology, weapon systems, and ornithopters, while soft elements include issues relating to religion, physical and mental training, cultures, politics, and psychology.[19]
Herbert said Paul's messiah figure was inspired by the Arthurian legend,[20] and that the scarcity of water on Arrakis was a metaphor for oil, as well as air and water itself, and for the shortages of resources caused by overpopulation.[21] Novelist Brian Herbert, his son and biographer, wrote:
Dune is a modern-day conglomeration of familiar myths, a tale in which great sandworms guard a precious treasure of melange, the geriatric spice that represents, among other things, the finite resource of oil. The planet Arrakis features immense, ferocious worms that are like dragons of lore, with "great teeth" and a "bellows breath of cinnamon." This resembles the myth described by an unknown English poet in Beowulf, the compelling tale of a fearsome fire dragon who guarded a great treasure hoard in a lair under cliffs, at the edge of the sea. The desert of Frank Herbert's classic novel is a vast ocean of sand, with giant worms diving into the depths, the mysterious and unrevealed domain of Shai-hulud. Dune tops are like the crests of waves, and there are powerful sandstorms out there, creating extreme danger. On Arrakis, life is said to emanate from the Maker (Shai-hulud) in the desert-sea; similarly all life on Earth is believed to have evolved from our oceans. Frank Herbert drew parallels, used spectacular metaphors, and extrapolated present conditions into world systems that seem entirely alien at first blush. But close examination reveals they aren't so different from systems we know ... and the book characters of his imagination are not so different from people familiar to us.[22]
Each chapter of Dune begins with an epigraph excerpted from the fictional writings of the character Princess Irulan. In forms such as diary entries, historical commentary, biography, quotations and philosophy, these writings set tone and provide exposition, context and other details intended to enhance understanding of Herbert's complex fictional universe and themes.[23][24][25] They act as foreshadowing and invite the reader to keep reading to close the gap between what the epigraph says and what is happening in the main narrative.[26] The epigraphs also give the reader the feeling that the world they are reading about is epically distanced, since Irulan writes about an idealized image of Paul as if he had already passed into memory.[27] Brian Herbert wrote: "Dad told me that you could follow any of the novel's layers as you read it, and then start the book all over again, focusing on an entirely different layer. At the end of the book, he intentionally left loose ends and said he did this to send the readers spinning out of the story with bits and pieces of it still clinging to them, so that they would want to go back and read it again."[28]


### Middle-Eastern and Islamic references
Due to the similarities between some of Herbert's terms and ideas and actual words and concepts in the Arabic language, as well as the series' "Islamic undertones" and themes, a Middle-Eastern influence on Herbert's works has been noted repeatedly.[29][30] In his descriptions of the Fremen culture and language, Herbert uses both authentic Arabic words and Arabic-sounding words.[31][32] For example, one of the names for the sandworm, Shai-hulud, is derived from شيء خلود, šayʾ ḫulūd, 'immortal thing' or شيخ خلود, šayḫ ḫulūd, 'old man of eternity'.[32][33] The title of the Fremen housekeeper, the Shadout Mapes, is borrowed from the شادوف, šādūf, the Egyptian term for a device used to raise water.[32] In particular, words related to the messianic religion of the Fremen, first implanted by the Bene Gesserit, are taken from Arabic, including Muad'Dib (from مؤدب, muʾaddib, 'educator'), Lisan al-Gaib (from لسان الغيب, lisān al-ġayb, 'voice of the unseen'), Usul (from أصول, ʾuṣūl, 'fundamental principles'), Shari-a (from شريعة, šarīʿa, 'sharia; path'), Shaitan (from شيطان, šayṭān, 'Shaitan; devil; fiend'), and jinn (from جن, ǧinn, 'jinn; spirit; demon; mythical being').[29] It is likely Herbert relied on second-hand resources such as phrasebooks and desert adventure stories to find these Arabic words and phrases for the Fremen.[32] They are meaningful and carefully chosen, and help create an "imagined desert culture that resonates with exotic sounds, enigmas, and pseudo-Islamic references" and has a distinctly Bedouin aesthetic.[32]
As a foreigner who adopts the ways of a desert-dwelling people and then leads them in a military capacity, Paul Atreides bears many similarities to the historical T. E. Lawrence.[34] His 1962 biopic Lawrence of Arabia has also been identified as a potential influence.[35] The Sabres of Paradise (1960) has also been identified as a potential influence upon Dune, with its depiction of Imam Shamil and the Islamic culture of the Caucasus inspiring some of the themes, characters, events and terminology of Dune.[8]
The environment of the desert planet Arrakis was primarily inspired by the environments of the Middle East. Similarly Arrakis as a bioregion is presented as a particular kind of political site. Herbert has made it resemble a desertified petrostate area.[36] The Fremen people of Arrakis were influenced by the Bedouin tribes of Arabia, and the Mahdi prophecy originates from Islamic eschatology.[37] Inspiration is also adopted from medieval historian Ibn Khaldun's cyclical history and his dynastic concept in North Africa, hinted at by Herbert's reference to Khaldun's book Kitāb al-ʿibar ("The Book of Lessons"). The fictionalized version of the "Kitab al-ibar" in Dune is a combination of a Fremen religious manual and a desert survival book.[38][39]
In addition to Arabic, Dune derives words and names from a variety of other languages, including Navajo, Latin, Old Scandinavian ("Landsraad"),[40] Romani, Hebrew ("Kefitzat haderech", קפיצת הדרך, contracting of the path), Serbo-Croatian, Nahuatl, Greek, Persian, Sanskrit ("prana bindu", "prajna"), Russian, Turkish, Finnish, and Old English.[41][42] Bene Gesserit is part of the Latin legal phrase quamdiu se bene gesserit "as long as he shall behave himself well" seen in grants of certain offices (such as judgeships) meaning that the appointee shall remain in office so long as he shall not be guilty of abusing it. Some critics miss the connotation of the phrase, misled by the Latin future perfect gesserit, taking it over-literally (and adding an unwarranted passive) to mean "it will have been well borne", an interpretation which is not well supported by the Bene Gesserit doctrine in the story.[43][original research?]
Through the inspiration from The Sabres of Paradise, there are also allusions to the tsarist-era Russian nobility and Cossacks.[44] Frank Herbert stated that bureaucracy that lasted long enough would become a hereditary nobility, and a significant theme behind the aristocratic families in Dune was "aristocratic bureaucracy" which he saw as analogous to the Soviet Union.[45][46]


### Environmentalism and ecology
Dune has been called the "first planetary ecology novel on a grand scale".[47] Herbert hoped it would be seen as an "environmental awareness handbook" and said the title was meant to "echo the sound of 'doom'".[48] It was reviewed in the best-selling countercultural Whole Earth Catalog in 1968 as a "rich re-readable fantasy with clear portrayal of the fierce environment it takes to cohere a community".[49]
After the publication of Silent Spring by Rachel Carson in 1962, science fiction writers began treating the subject of ecological change and its consequences. Dune responded in 1965 with its complex descriptions of Arrakis life, from giant sandworms (for whom water is deadly) to smaller, mouse-like life-forms adapted to live with limited water. Dune was followed in its creation of complex and unique ecologies by other science fiction books such as A Door into Ocean (1986) and Red Mars (1992).[47] Environmentalists have pointed out that Dune's popularity as a novel depicting a planet as a complex—almost living—thing, in combination with the first images of Earth from space being published in the same time period, strongly influenced environmental movements such as the establishment of the international Earth Day.[50]
While the genre of climate fiction was popularized in the 2010s in response to real global climate change, Dune as well as other early science fiction works from authors like J. G. Ballard (The Drowned World) and Kim Stanley Robinson (the Mars trilogy) have retroactively been considered pioneering examples of the genre.[51][52]


### Declining empires
The Imperium in Dune contains features of various empires in Europe and the Near East, including the Roman Empire, Holy Roman Empire, and Ottoman Empire.[33][53][54] Lorenzo DiTommaso compared Dune's portrayal of the downfall of a galactic empire to Edward Gibbon's Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire, which argues that Christianity allied with the profligacy of the Roman elite led to the fall of Ancient Rome. In "The Articulation of Imperial Decadence and Decline in Epic Science Fiction" (2007), DiTommaso outlines similarities between the two works by highlighting the excesses of the Emperor on his home planet of Kaitain and of the Baron Harkonnen in his palace. The Emperor loses his effectiveness as a ruler through an excess of ceremony and pomp. The hairdressers and attendants he brings with him to Arrakis are even referred to as "parasites". The Baron Harkonnen is similarly corrupt and materially indulgent. Gibbon's Decline and Fall partly blames the fall of Rome on the rise of Christianity. Gibbon claimed that this exotic import from a conquered province weakened the soldiers of Rome and left it open to attack. The Emperor's Sardaukar fighters are little match for the Fremen of Dune not only because of the Sardaukar's overconfidence and the fact that Jessica and Paul have trained the Fremen in their battle tactics, but because of the Fremen's capacity for self-sacrifice. The Fremen put the community before themselves in every instance, while the world outside wallows in luxury at the expense of others.[55]
The decline and long peace of the Empire sets the stage for revolution and renewal by genetic mixing of successful and unsuccessful groups through war, a process culminating in the Jihad led by Paul Atreides, described by Frank Herbert as depicting "war as a collective orgasm" (drawing on Norman Walter's 1950 The Sexual Cycle of Human Warfare),[56][57] themes that would reappear in God Emperor of Dune's Scattering and Leto II's all-female Fish Speaker army.


### Gender dynamics
Gender dynamics are complex in Dune. Herbert offers a multi-layered portrayal of gender roles within the context of a feudal, hierarchical society, particularly through the Bene Gesserit Sisterhood. Although the Bene Gesserit tend to hold roles that are traditionally associated with women, such as wives, concubines, and mothers, their characters transcend stereotypes as they play politics and pursue long-term strategic goals. Full gender equality is not depicted in Dune, but the Bene Gesserit use specialized training and access to high-ranking men to gain agency and power within the constraints of their environment. Their training in prana-bindu allows them to exert control over their minds and bodies, including over pregnancy, and they are skilled in hand-to-hand combat and use of the Voice to command others. Jessica's disobedience in bearing a son instead of daughter and training him in the Bene Gesserit Way is a major plot point that sets in motion the events of the novel.[58][59] By setting up certain women with leaders of certain Houses in the Imperium, the Bene Gesserit can control bloodlines across generations through their secret breeding program.[60] Even within the male-dominated Imperium, then, the Bene Gesserit wield reproductive power and choose which genetic markers to continue into the future.[61]
Reverend Mother Mohiam uses skills in Truthsaying to act as the Emperor's official Truthsayer and advisor. Her role can be considered similar to that of abbesses in the medieval Church. Before Princess Irulan appears as a character who agrees to a political marriage with Paul, she acts as a historian who shapes the reader's interpretation of the story and Paul's legacy due to the excerpts from her writing that frame each chapter.[58][59]
Among the Fremen, women have roles as mothers and wives and also exercise agency through combat and religious authority. Fremen women and children have a reputation for being just as violent and dangerous as Fremen men. Chani travels with Stilgar in his military party, armed like the others. After becoming Paul's concubine, she kills one of the men who comes to challenge him. Alia leads an attack against the Emperor's Sardaukar and kills Baron Harkonnen with a gom jabbar. Women also take on the role of religious leaders. Chani is a Sayyadina who presides over tribal rituals such as Paul's worm-riding test, and Reverend Mother Ramallo carries the tribe's memories and passes them along to Jessica through the Water of Life ceremony. Within the male-led sietches, Fremen women find different avenues of authority.[62]
The gom jabbar test of humanity is administered by the female Bene Gesserit order but rarely to males.[63] The Bene Gesserit have seemingly mastered the unconscious and can play on the unconscious weaknesses of others using the Voice, yet their breeding program seeks after a male Kwisatz Haderach.[34] Their plan is to produce a male who can "possess complete racial memory, both male and female," and look into the black hole in the collective unconscious that they fear.[64] A central theme of the book is the connection, in Jessica's son, of this female aspect with his male aspect. This aligns with concepts in Jungian psychology, which features conscious/unconscious and taking/giving roles associated with males and females, as well as the idea of the collective unconscious.[65] Paul's approach to power consistently requires his upbringing under the matriarchal Bene Gesserit, who operate as a long-dominating shadow government behind all of the great houses and their marriages or divisions.[64] He is trained by Jessica in the Bene Gesserit Way, which includes prana-bindu training in nerve and muscle control and precise perception.[59] Paul also receives Mentat training, thus helping prepare him to be a type of androgynous Kwisatz Haderach, a male Reverend Mother.[64]
In a Bene Gesserit test early in the book, it is implied that people are generally "inhuman" in that they irrationally place desire over self-interest and reason.[citation needed] This applies Herbert's philosophy that humans are not created equal, while equal justice and equal opportunity are higher ideals than mental, physical, or moral equality.[66]


### Heroism
I am showing you the superhero syndrome and your own participation in it.
— Frank Herbert[67]
Throughout Paul's rise to superhuman status, he follows a plotline common to many stories describing the birth of a hero.[68] He has unfortunate circumstances forced onto him. After a long period of hardship and exile, he confronts and defeats the source of evil in his tale.[69][70] As such, Dune is representative of a general trend beginning in 1960s American science fiction in that it features a character who attains godlike status through scientific means.[71] Eventually, Paul Atreides gains a level of omniscience which allows him to take over the planet and the galaxy, and causes the Fremen of Arrakis to worship him like a god. Author Frank Herbert said in 1979, "The bottom line of the Dune trilogy is: beware of heroes. Much better to rely on your own judgment, and your own mistakes."[72] He wrote in 1985, "Dune was aimed at this whole idea of the infallible leader because my view of history says that mistakes made by a leader (or made in a leader's name) are amplified by the numbers who follow without question."[73]
Juan A. Prieto-Pablos says Herbert achieves a new typology with Paul's superpowers, differentiating the heroes of Dune from earlier heroes such as Superman, van Vogt's Gilbert Gosseyn and Henry Kuttner's telepaths. Unlike previous superheroes who acquire their powers suddenly and accidentally, Paul's are the result of "painful and slow personal progress." And unlike other superheroes of the 1960s—who are the exception among ordinary people in their respective worlds—Herbert's characters grow their powers through "the application of mystical philosophies and techniques." For Herbert, the ordinary person can develop incredible fighting skills (Fremen, Ginaz swordsmen and Sardaukar) or mental abilities (Bene Gesserit, Mentats, Spacing Guild Navigators).[74]


### Zen and religion
Early in his newspaper career, Herbert was introduced to Zen by two Jungian psychologists, Ralph and Irene Slattery, who "gave a crucial boost to his thinking".[75] Zen teachings ultimately had "a profound and continuing influence on [Herbert's] work".[75] Throughout the Dune series and particularly in Dune, Herbert employs concepts and forms borrowed from Zen Buddhism.[75][76] The Fremen are referred to as Zensunni adherents, and many of Herbert's epigraphs are Zen-spirited.[77] In "Dune Genesis", Frank Herbert wrote:
What especially pleases me is to see the interwoven themes, the fugue like relationships of images that exactly replay the way Dune took shape. As in an Escher lithograph, I involved myself with recurrent themes that turn into paradox. The central paradox concerns the human vision of time. What about Paul's gift of prescience—the Presbyterian fixation? For the Delphic Oracle to perform, it must tangle itself in a web of predestination. Yet predestination negates surprises and, in fact, sets up a mathematically enclosed universe whose limits are always inconsistent, always encountering the unprovable. It's like a koan, a Zen mind breaker. It's like the Cretan Epimenides saying, "All Cretans are liars."[66]
Brian Herbert called the Dune universe "a spiritual melting pot", noting that his father incorporated elements of a variety of religions, including Buddhism, Sufi mysticism and other Islamic belief systems, Catholicism, Protestantism, Judaism, and Hinduism.[78] He added that Frank Herbert's fictional future in which "religious beliefs have combined into interesting forms" represents the author's solution to eliminating arguments between religions, each of which claimed to have "the one and only revelation."[78][79]


### Asimov'sFoundation
Tim O'Reilly suggests that Herbert also wrote Dune as a counterpoint to Isaac Asimov's Foundation series. In his monograph on Frank Herbert, O'Reilly wrote that "Dune is clearly a commentary on the Foundation trilogy. Herbert has taken a look at the same imaginative situation that provoked Asimov's classic—the decay of a galactic empire—and restated it in a way that draws on different assumptions and suggests radically different conclusions. The twist he has introduced into Dune is that the Mule, not the Foundation, is his hero."[80] According to O'Reilly, Herbert bases the Bene Gesserit on the scientific shamans of the Foundation, though they use biological rather than statistical science.[80] In contrast to the Foundation series and its praise of science and rationality, Dune proposes that the unconscious and unexpected are actually what are needed for humanity.[80]
Both Herbert and Asimov explore the implications of prescience (i.e., visions of the future) both psychologically and socially. The Foundation series deploys a broadly determinist approach to prescient vision rooted in mathematical reasoning on a macroscopic social level. Dune, by contrast, invents a biologically rooted power of prescience that becomes determinist when the user actively relies on it to navigate past an undefined threshold of detail. Herbert's eugenically produced and spice-enhanced prescience is also personalized to individual actors whose roles in later books constrain each other's visions, rendering the future more or less mutable as time progresses. In what might be a comment on Foundation, Herbert's most powerfully prescient being in God Emperor of Dune laments the boredom engendered by prescience, and values surprises, especially regarding one's death, as a psychological necessity.[citation needed]
However, both works contain a similar theme of the restoration of civilization[81] and seem to make the fundamental assumption that "political maneuvering, the need to control material resources, and friendship or mating bonds will be fundamentally the same in the future as they are now."[82]


## Critical reception
Dune tied with Roger Zelazny's This Immortal for the Hugo Award in 1966[83] and won the inaugural Nebula Award for Best Novel.[84] Reviews of the novel have been largely positive, and Dune is considered by some critics to be the best science fiction book ever written.[85] The novel has been translated into dozens of languages, and has sold almost 20 million copies.[86] Dune has been regularly cited as one of the world's best-selling science fiction novels.[3][87]
Arthur C. Clarke described Dune as "unique" and wrote, "I know nothing comparable to it except The Lord of the Rings."[88] Robert A. Heinlein described the novel as "powerful, convincing, and most ingenious."[88][89] It was described as "one of the monuments of modern science fiction" by the Chicago Tribune,[88] and P. Schuyler Miller called Dune "one of the landmarks of modern science fiction ... an amazing feat of creation."[89] The Washington Post described it as "a portrayal of an alien society more complete and deeply detailed than any other author in the field has managed ... a story absorbing equally for its action and philosophical vistas ... An astonishing science fiction phenomenon."[88][89] Algis Budrys praised Dune for the vividness of its imagined setting, saying "The time lives. It breathes, it speaks, and Herbert has smelt it in his nostrils". He found that the novel, however, "turns flat and tails off at the end. ... [T]ruly effective villains simply simper and melt; fierce men and cunning statesmen and seeresses all bend before this new Messiah". Budrys faulted in particular Herbert's decision to kill Paul's infant son offstage, with no apparent emotional impact, saying "you cannot be so busy saving a world that you cannot hear an infant shriek".[90] After criticizing unrealistic science fiction, Carl Sagan in 1978 listed Dune as among stories "that are so tautly constructed, so rich in the accommodating details of an unfamiliar society that they sweep me along before I have even a chance to be critical".[91]
The Louisville Times wrote, "Herbert's creation of this universe, with its intricate development and analysis of ecology, religion, politics, and philosophy, remains one of the supreme and seminal achievements in science fiction."[89] Writing for The New Yorker, Jon Michaud praised Herbert's "clever authorial decision" to exclude robots and computers ("two staples of the genre") from his fictional universe, but suggested that this may be one explanation why Dune lacks "true fandom among science-fiction fans" to the extent that it "has not penetrated popular culture in the way that The Lord of the Rings and Star Wars have".[14] Tamara I. Hladik wrote that the story "crafts a universe where lesser novels promulgate excuses for sequels. All its rich elements are in balance and plausible—not the patchwork confederacy of made-up languages, contrived customs, and meaningless histories that are the hallmark of so many other, lesser novels."[92]
On November 5, 2019, the BBC News listed Dune on its list of the 100 most influential novels.[93]
J. R. R. Tolkien refused to review Dune, on the grounds that he disliked it "with some intensity" and thus felt it would be unfair to Herbert, another working author, if he gave an honest review of the book.[94]


## First edition prints and manuscripts
The first edition of Dune is one of the most valuable in science fiction book collecting. Copies have been sold for more than $20,000 at auction.[95]
California State University, Fullerton's Pollak Library has several of Herbert's draft manuscripts of Dune and other works, with the author's notes, in their Frank Herbert Archives.[96]


## Sequels and prequels
After Dune proved to be a critical and financial success for Herbert, he was able to devote himself full time to writing additional novels in the series. He had already drafted parts of the second and third while writing Dune.[14] The series included Dune Messiah (1969), Children of Dune (1976), God Emperor of Dune (1981), Heretics of Dune (1984), and Chapterhouse: Dune (1985), each sequentially continuing on the narrative from Dune. Herbert died on February 11, 1986.[97]
Herbert's son, Brian Herbert, had found several thousand pages of notes left by his father that outlined ideas for other narratives related to Dune. Brian Herbert enlisted author Kevin J. Anderson to help build out prequel novels to the events of Dune. Brian Herbert's and Anderson's Dune prequels first started publication in 1999, and have led to additional stories that take place between those of Frank Herbert's books.[98] The notes for what would have been Dune 7 also enabled them to publish Hunters of Dune (2006) and Sandworms of Dune (2007), sequels to Frank Herbert's final novel Chapterhouse: Dune, which complete the chronological progression of his original series, and wrap up storylines that began in Heretics of Dune.


## Adaptations
Dune has been considered an "unfilmable" and "uncontainable" work to adapt from novel to film or other visual medium.[99] Described by Wired, "It has four appendices and a glossary of its own gibberish, and its action takes place on two planets, one of which is a desert overrun by worms the size of airport runways. Lots of important people die or try to kill each other, and they're all tethered to about eight entangled subplots."[100] There have been several attempts to achieve this difficult conversion with various degrees of success.[101]


### Early stalled attempts
In 1971, the production company Apjac International (APJ) (headed by Arthur P. Jacobs) optioned the rights to film Dune. As Jacobs was busy with other projects, such as the sequel to Planet of the Apes, Dune was delayed for another year. Jacobs' first choice for director was David Lean, but he turned down the offer. Charles Jarrott was also considered to direct. Work was also under way on a script while the hunt for a director continued. Initially, the first treatment had been handled by Robert Greenhut, the producer who had lobbied Jacobs to make the movie in the first place, but subsequently Rospo Pallenberg was approached to write the script, with shooting scheduled to begin in 1974. However, Jacobs died in 1973.[102]
In December 1974, a French consortium led by Jean-Paul Gibon purchased the film rights from APJ, with Alejandro Jodorowsky set to direct.[103] In 1975, Jodorowsky planned to film the story as a 3-hour feature, set to star his own son Brontis Jodorowsky in the lead role of Paul Atreides, Salvador Dalí as Shaddam IV, Padishah Emperor, Amanda Lear as Princess Irulan, Orson Welles as Baron Vladimir Harkonnen, Gloria Swanson as Reverend Mother Gaius Helen Mohiam, David Carradine as Duke Leto Atreides, Geraldine Chaplin as Lady Jessica, Alain Delon as Duncan Idaho, Hervé Villechaize as Gurney Halleck, Udo Kier as Piter De Vries, and Mick Jagger as Feyd-Rautha. It was at first proposed to score the film with original music by Karlheinz Stockhausen, Henry Cow, and Magma; later on, the soundtrack was to be provided by Pink Floyd.[104] Jodorowsky set up a pre-production unit in Paris consisting of Chris Foss, a British artist who designed covers for science fiction periodicals, Jean Giraud (Moebius), a French illustrator who created and also wrote and drew for Metal Hurlant magazine, and H. R. Giger.[103] Moebius began designing creatures and characters for the film, while Foss was brought in to design the film's space ships and hardware.[103] Giger began designing the Harkonnen Castle based on Moebius's storyboards. Dan O'Bannon was to head the special effects department.[103]
Dalí was cast as the Emperor.[103] Dalí later demanded to be paid $100,000 per hour; Jodorowsky agreed, but tailored Dalí's part to be filmed in one hour, drafting plans for other scenes of the emperor to use a mechanical mannequin as substitute for Dalí.[103] According to Giger, Dalí was "later invited to leave the film because of his pro-Franco statements".[105] Just as the storyboards, designs, and script were finished, the financial backing dried up. Frank Herbert traveled to Europe in 1976 to find that $2 million of the $9.5 million budget had already been spent in pre-production, and that Jodorowsky's script would result in a 14-hour movie ("It was the size of a phone book", Herbert later recalled). Jodorowsky took creative liberties with the source material, but Herbert said that he and Jodorowsky had an amicable relationship. Jodorowsky said in 1985 that he found the Dune story mythical and had intended to re-create it rather than adapt the novel; though he had an "enthusiastic admiration" for Herbert, Jodorowsky said he had done everything possible to distance the author and his input from the project.[103] Although Jodorowsky was embittered by the experience, he said the Dune project changed his life, and some of the ideas were used in his and Moebius's The Incal.[106] O'Bannon entered a psychiatric hospital after the production failed, then worked on 13 scripts, the last of which became Alien.[103] A 2013 documentary, Jodorowsky's Dune, was made about Jodorowsky's failed attempt at an adaptation.
In 1976, Dino De Laurentiis acquired the rights from Gibon's consortium. De Laurentiis commissioned Herbert to write a new screenplay in 1978; the script Herbert turned in was 175 pages long, the equivalent of nearly three hours of screen time. De Laurentiis then hired director Ridley Scott in 1979, with Rudy Wurlitzer writing the screenplay and H. R. Giger retained from the Jodorowsky production; Scott and Giger had also just worked together on the film Alien, after O'Bannon recommended the artist.[107][108] Scott intended to split the novel into two movies. He worked on three drafts of the script, using The Battle of Algiers as a point of reference, before moving on to direct another science fiction film, Blade Runner (1982). As he recalls, the pre-production process was slow, and finishing the project would have been even more time-intensive:
But after seven months I dropped out of Dune, by then Rudy Wurlitzer had come up with a first-draft script which I felt was a decent distillation of Frank Herbert's. But I also realised Dune was going to take a lot more work—at least two and a half years' worth. And I didn't have the heart to attack that because my older brother Frank unexpectedly died of cancer while I was prepping the De Laurentiis picture. Frankly, that freaked me out. So I went to Dino and told him the Dune script was his.
—From Ridley Scott: The Making of his Movies by Paul M. Sammon
A draft of the screenplay for the Scott version was discovered in 2024 in the Wheaton College archives.[109]


### 1984 film by David Lynch
In 1981, the nine-year film rights were set to expire. De Laurentiis re-negotiated the rights from the author, adding to them the rights to the Dune sequels (written and unwritten). After seeing The Elephant Man, De Laurentiis' daughter Raffaella decided that David Lynch should direct the movie. Around that time Lynch received several other directing offers, including Return of the Jedi. He agreed to direct Dune and write the screenplay even though he had not read the book, was not familiar with the story, or even been interested in science fiction.[110] Lynch worked on the script for six months with Eric Bergren and Christopher De Vore. The team yielded two drafts of the script before it split over creative differences. Lynch would subsequently work on five more drafts. Production of the work was troubled by problems at the Mexican studio and hampering the film's timeline.[111] Lynch ended up producing a nearly three-hour-long film, but at demands from Universal Pictures, the film's distributor, he cut it back to about two hours, hastily filming additional scenes to make up for some of the cut footage.[112]
This first film of Dune, directed by Lynch, was released in 1984, nearly 20 years after the book's publication. Though Herbert said the book's depth and symbolism seemed to intimidate many filmmakers, he was pleased with the film, saying that "They've got it. It begins as Dune does. And I hear my dialogue all the way through. There are some interpretations and liberties, but you're gonna come out knowing you've seen Dune."[113] Reviews of the film were negative, saying that it was incomprehensible to those unfamiliar with the book, and that fans would be disappointed by the way it strayed from the book's plot.[99][114][115][116][117] Upon release for television and other forms of home media, Universal opted to reintroduce much of the footage that Lynch had cut, creating an over-three-hour-long version with extensive monologue exposition. Lynch was extremely displeased with this move, and demanded that Universal replace his name on these cuts with the pseudonym "Alan Smithee", and has generally distanced himself from the film since.[112]


### 2000 miniseries by John Harrison
In 2000, John Harrison adapted the novel into Frank Herbert's Dune, a miniseries that premiered on the Sci-Fi Channel.[17] As of 2004, the miniseries was one of the three highest-rated programs broadcast on the Sci-Fi Channel.[118]


### Further film attempts
In 2008, Paramount Pictures announced that they would produce a new film based on the book, with Peter Berg attached to direct.[119] Producer Kevin Misher, who spent a year securing the rights from the Herbert estate, was to be joined by Richard Rubinstein and John Harrison (of both Sci-Fi Channel miniseries) as well as Sarah Aubrey and Mike Messina.[119] The producers stated that they were going for a "faithful adaptation" of the novel and considered "its theme of finite ecological resources particularly timely".[119] Science fiction author Kevin J. Anderson and Frank Herbert's son Brian Herbert, who had together written multiple Dune sequels and prequels since 1999, were attached to the project as technical advisors.[120] In October 2009, Berg dropped out of the project, later saying that it "for a variety of reasons wasn't the right thing" for him.[121] Subsequently, with a script draft by Joshua Zetumer, Paramount reportedly sought a new director who could do the film for under $175 million.[122] In 2010, Pierre Morel was signed on to direct, with screenwriter Chase Palmer incorporating Morel's vision of the project into Zetumer's original draft.[123][124] By November 2010, Morel left the project.[125] Paramount finally dropped plans for a remake in March 2011.[126]


### Films by Denis Villeneuve
In November 2016, Legendary Entertainment acquired the film and TV rights for Dune.[127][128] Variety reported in December 2016 that Denis Villeneuve was in negotiations to direct the project,[129] which was confirmed in February 2017.[130] In April 2017, Legendary announced that Eric Roth would write the screenplay.[131] Villeneuve explained in March 2018 that his adaptation will be split into two films, with the first installment scheduled to begin production in 2019.[132] Casting includes Timothée Chalamet as Paul Atreides,[133] Dave Bautista as Rabban, Stellan Skarsgård as Baron Harkonnen,[134] Rebecca Ferguson as Lady Jessica,[135] Charlotte Rampling as Reverend Mother Mohiam,[136] Oscar Isaac as Duke Leto Atreides,[137] Zendaya as Chani,[138] Javier Bardem as Stilgar,[139] Josh Brolin as Gurney Halleck,[140] Jason Momoa as Duncan Idaho,[141] David Dastmalchian as Piter De Vries,[142] Chang Chen as Dr. Yueh,[143] and Stephen Henderson as Thufir Hawat.[144] Warner Bros. Pictures distributed the film, which had its initial premiere on September 3, 2021, at the Venice Film Festival,[145] and wide release in both theaters and streaming on HBO Max on October 21, 2021, as part of Warner Bros.' approach to handling the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the film industry.[146][147] The film received "generally favorable reviews" on Metacritic.[148] It has gone on to win multiple awards and was named by the National Board of Review as one of the 10 best films of 2021, as well as the American Film Institute in their annual top 10 list.[149] The film went on to be nominated for ten Academy Awards, winning six, the most wins of the night for any film in contention.[150]
A sequel, Dune: Part Two, was scheduled for release on November 3, 2023,[151] but was released on March 1, 2024, due to the 2023 SAG-AFTRA strike.[152] It had its world premiere at the Odeon Luxe Leicester Square, London, on February 15, 2024, and opened in the United States on March 1. It received critical acclaim especially for its visual effects and has grossed over $711 million worldwide, making it the fourth-highest-grossing film of 2024.


### Audiobooks
In 1993, Recorded Books Inc. released a 20-disc audiobook narrated by George Guidall. In 2007, Audio Renaissance released an audio book narrated by Simon Vance with some parts performed by Scott Brick, Orlagh Cassidy, Euan Morton, and other performers.


## Cultural influence
Dune has been widely influential, inspiring numerous novels, music, films, television, games, and comic books.[153] It is considered one of the most influential science fiction novels of all time, with numerous modern science fiction works owing their existence to Dune.[citation needed] Dune has been referenced in numerous works of popular culture, including Star Wars, Star Trek, Chronicles of Riddick, The Kingkiller Chronicle and Futurama.[154] Dune was cited as a source of inspiration for Hayao Miyazaki's anime film Nausicaä of the Valley of the Wind (1984) for its post-apocalyptic world.[155][156][157][158][159]
Dune was parodied in 1984's National Lampoon's Doon by Ellis Weiner, which William F. Touponce called "something of a tribute to Herbert's success on college campuses", noting that "the only other book to have been so honored is Tolkien's The Lord of the Rings," which was parodied by The Harvard Lampoon in 1969.[160]


### Music
In 1977, David Matthews became one of the first artists to dedicate an entire composition to Dune, publishing an album of the same name on CTI Records.[161]
In 1978, French electronic musician Richard Pinhas released the nine-track Dune-inspired album Chronolyse, which includes the seven-part Variations sur le thème des Bene Gesserit.[162]
In 1979, German electronic music pioneer Klaus Schulze released an LP titled Dune featuring motifs and lyrics inspired by the novel.[163]
A similar musical project, Visions of Dune, was released also in 1979 by Zed (a pseudonym of French electronic musician Bernard Sjazner).[164]
1981 French zeuhl band Dün released their album Eros which was inspired by the Dune novel, also their band name Dün was a short form from their temporary name Dune.[165]
Heavy metal band Iron Maiden wrote the song "To Tame a Land" based on the Dune story. It appears as the closing track to their 1983 album Piece of Mind. The original working title of the song was "Dune"; however, the band was denied permission to use it, with Frank Herbert's agents stating "Frank Herbert doesn't like rock bands, particularly heavy rock bands, and especially bands like Iron Maiden".[166]
Dune inspired the German happy hardcore band Dune, who have released several albums with space travel-themed songs.[citation needed]
The progressive hardcore band Shai Hulud took their name from Dune.[167]
In 1988, New Zealand rock band Shihad chose their name based on "Jihad", the holy war scene from David Lynch's 1984 film.[168]
"Traveller in Time", from the 1991 Blind Guardian album Tales from the Twilight World, is based mostly on Paul Atreides' visions of future and past.[169][170]
The title of the 1993 Fear Factory album Fear is The Mindkiller is a quote from the "litany against fear".[171]
The song "Near Fantastica", from the Matthew Good album Avalanche, makes reference to the "litany against fear", repeating "can't feel fear, fear's the mind killer" through a section of the song.[172]
In the Fatboy Slim song "Weapon of Choice", the line "If you walk without rhythm/You won't attract the worm" is a near quotation from the sections of novel in which Stilgar teaches Paul to ride sandworms. Christopher Walken, who would later star in Dune: Part Two as Emperor Shaddam IV, appears in the music video.[173]
Dune also inspired the 1999 album The 2nd Moon by the German death metal band Golem, which is a concept album about the series.[174]
The song "The Eyes of Ibad" from Panchiko's 2000 EP D>E>A>T>H>M>E>T>A>L, takes its name from Dune, referencing the blue-in-blue eyes of the Fremen.
Dune influenced Thirty Seconds to Mars on their self-titled debut album.[175]
The Youngblood Brass Band's song "Is an Elegy" on Center:Level:Roar references "Muad'Dib", "Arrakis" and other elements from the novel.[176]
The debut album of Canadian musician Grimes, called Geidi Primes, is a concept album based on Dune.[177][178]
In 2015, the Baltimore-based band Tendrills released a psych rock album called 10,191. The album's title, sound, emotionality, and some of its lyrics were inspired by the Dune novels.[179]
Japanese singer Kenshi Yonezu, released a song titled "Dune", also known as "Sand Planet". The song was released on 2017, and it was created using the voice synthesizer Hatsune Miku for her 10th anniversary.[180]
Sleep's 2018 album The Sciences features a song, Giza Butler, that references several aspects of Dune.[181]
Tool's 2019 album Fear Inoculum has a song entitled "Litanie contre la peur (Litany against fear)".[182]
"Rare to Wake", from Shannon Lay's album Geist (2019), is inspired by Dune.[183]
Heavy metal band Diamond Head based the song "The Sleeper" and its prelude, both off the album The Coffin Train, on the series.


### Games
There have been a number of games based on the book, starting with the strategy–adventure game Dune (1992). The most important game adaptation is Dune II (1992), which established the conventions of modern real-time strategy games and is considered to be among the most influential video games of all time.[184]
The online game Lost Souls includes Dune-derived elements, including sandworms and melange—addiction to which can produce psychic talents.[185] The 2016 game Enter the Gungeon features the spice melange as a random item which gives the player progressively stronger abilities and penalties with repeated uses, mirroring the long-term effects melange has on users.[186]
Rick Priestley cites Dune as a major influence on his 1987 wargame, Warhammer 40,000.[187]
In 2023, Funcom announced Dune: Awakening, an upcoming massively multiplayer online game set in the universe of Dune.[188][189][190]


### Space exploration
The Apollo 15 astronauts named a small crater on Earth's Moon after the novel during the 1971 mission,[191] and the name was formally adopted by the International Astronomical Union in 1973.[192] Since 2009, the names of planets from the Dune novels have been adopted for the real-world nomenclature of plains and other features on Saturn's moon Titan, like Arrakis Planitia.[193][194][195]


## See also
Novels portal
Soft science fiction – Sub-genre of science fiction emphasizing "soft" sciences or human emotions
Hydraulic empire – Government by control of access to water
Genetics in fiction – Genetics as a theme in fiction
Space travel in science fiction – Fictional methods, e.g. antigravity, hyperdrive
Religious order – Groups based on religious devotion


## References
^ a b Hanson, Matt (2005). Building Sci-fi Moviescapes: The Science Behind the Fiction. Gulf Professional Publishing. ISBN 978-0-240-80772-0.
^ "Frank Herbert. Dune. Philadelphia / New York: Chilton Books". Heritage Auctions. Retrieved June 16, 2024.
^ a b "SCI FI Channel Auction to Benefit Reading Is Fundamental". PNNonline.org (Internet Archive). March 18, 2003. Archived from the original on September 28, 2007. Retrieved September 28, 2007. Since its debut in 1965, Frank Herbert's Dune has sold over 12 million copies worldwide, making it the best-selling science fiction novel of all time ... Frank Herbert's Dune saga is one of the greatest 20th-century contributions to literature.
^ The Road to Dune (2005), p. 264, letter by Frank Herbert to his agent Lurton Blassingame outlining "They Stopped the Moving Sands."
^ O'Reilly, Timothy (1981). Frank Herbert. Frederick Ungar Publishing Company. p. 39. Archived from the original on August 6, 2021. Retrieved August 1, 2021.
^ Immerwahr, Daniel (November 19, 2020). "Heresies of 'Dune'". Los Angeles Review of Books. Archived from the original on June 28, 2022. Retrieved June 28, 2022.
^ O'Reilly, Timothy (1981). Frank Herbert. Frederick Ungar Publishing Company. pp. 43–45. Archived from the original on August 6, 2021. Retrieved August 1, 2021.
^ a b c d Collins, Will (September 16, 2017). "The Secret History of Dune". Los Angeles Review of Books. Archived from the original on October 21, 2017. Retrieved October 20, 2017.
^ Stamets, Paul (2011). Mycelium Running: How Mushrooms Can Help Save the World. Potter/Ten Speed/Harmony/Rodale. pp. 126–127. ISBN 978-1-60774-124-4. Archived from the original on May 31, 2024. Retrieved February 13, 2021.
^ The Road to Dune, p. 272."...Frank Herbert toyed with the story about a desert world full of hazards and riches. He plotted a short adventure novel, Spice Planet, but he set that outline aside when his concept grew into something much more ambitious."
^ The Road to Dune, pp. 263–264.
^ Herbert, Brian (2004). Dreamer of Dune: The Biography of Frank Herbert. Macmillan. pp. 194, 208. ISBN 978-0-7653-0647-0. Archived from the original on May 31, 2024. Retrieved July 30, 2020.
^ DaSilva, Steve (October 26, 2021). "Nobody Wanted To Publish Dune Except A Car Repair Manual Company". Jalopnik. Archived from the original on October 26, 2021. Retrieved October 27, 2021.
^ a b c d Michaud, Jon (July 12, 2013). "Dune Endures". The New Yorker. Archived from the original on August 22, 2015. Retrieved August 18, 2015.
^ Boyle, Alan (October 21, 2021). "How the Dune science-fiction saga parallels the real science of Oregon's dunes". GeekWire. Archived from the original on December 2, 2021. Retrieved June 14, 2022.
^ Landa, Edward R.; Feller, Christian (2010). Soil and Culture. Springer Science & Business Media. p. 101. ISBN 978-90-481-2960-7. Archived from the original on May 31, 2024. Retrieved September 23, 2020.
^ a b Stasio, Marilyn (December 3, 2000). "Cover Story: Future Myths, Adrift in the Sands of Time". The New York Times. Archived from the original on December 22, 2015. Retrieved August 21, 2015.
^ Gunn, James (1986). "The Readers of Hard Science Fiction". In Slusser, George E.; Rabkin, Eric S. (eds.). Hard Science Fiction. Southern Illinois University Press. p. 79.
^ Allen, L. David (1975). Herbert's Dune and Other Works. Cliffs Notes. pp. 7–8.
^ Rare DUNE Interview with Frank Herbert (video). Archived from the original on August 29, 2020. Retrieved May 10, 2020.
^ Archived at Ghostarchive and the Wayback Machine: Frank Herbert Interview (video). Retrieved April 17, 2020.
^ Herbert, Brian (1965). "Afterword by Brian Herbert". Dune. By Herbert, Frank (Amazon Kindle ed.). Penguin Group. p. 876. ISBN 978-1-101658-05-5.
^ Fritz, Steve (December 4, 2000). "Dune: Remaking the Classic Novel". Cinescape.com. Archived from the original on March 16, 2008. Retrieved November 9, 2008.
^ Edison, David (February 3, 2014). "Quotes from the End of the World". Tor.com. Archived from the original on July 8, 2014. Retrieved June 29, 2014.
^ "Collected Sayings of Princess Irulan". DuneMessiah.com. Archived from the original on June 18, 2008. Retrieved November 9, 2008.
^ Manlove, C. N. (1986). Science fiction : ten explorations. Basingstoke, Hampshire: Macmillan. pp. 88–89. ISBN 978-0-333-36919-7. OCLC 14933209.
^ Touponce, William F. (1988). Frank Herbert. Boston: Twayne Publishers. p. 30. ISBN 978-0-8057-7514-3. OCLC 16717899.
^ Herbert, Brian (1965). "Afterword by Brian Herbert". Dune. By Herbert, Frank (Amazon Kindle ed.). Penguin Group. pp. 881–882. ISBN 978-1-101658-05-5.
^ a b Csicsery-Ronay, Istvan Jr. (November 28, 2008). The Seven Beauties of Science Fiction. Wesleyan. ISBN 978-0-8195-6889-2. Archived from the original on January 29, 2024. Retrieved November 10, 2020.
^ Bahayeldin, Khalid (January 22, 2004). "Arabic and Islamic themes in Frank Herbert's Dune". Baheyeldin.com. Archived from the original on May 12, 2011. Retrieved July 21, 2009.
^ Zaki, Hoda M. (1994). "Orientalism in Science Fiction". In Kadi, Joanna (ed.). Food for Our Grandmothers: Writings by Arab-American and Arab-Canadian Feminists. South End Press.
^ a b c d e Ryding, Karin (2021). "The Arabic of Dune: Language and Landscape". In Virdis, Daniela Francesca; Zurru, Elisabetta; Lahey, Ernestine (eds.). Language in Place: Stylistic Perspectives on Landscape, Place and Environment. John Benjamins Publishing Company.
^ a b Kennedy, Kara (April 2, 2016). "Epic World-Building: Names and Cultures in 'Dune". Names: A Journal of Onomastics. 64 (2): 99–108. doi:10.1080/00277738.2016.1159450. S2CID 192897269. Archived from the original on August 3, 2022. Retrieved September 19, 2021.
^ a b O'Reilly, Tim. "Chapter 3: From Concept to Fable". Frank Herbert. Archived from the original on July 17, 2012. Retrieved December 27, 2019 – via oreilly.com.
^ "Lawrence of Arabia Is the Unlikely Prequel to Star Wars, Dune, And All Your Favorite Fantasy Epics". New York Post. December 3, 2015. Archived from the original on June 16, 2019. Retrieved June 14, 2019 – via Decider.com.
^ Lynch, Tom; Glotfelty, Cheryll; Armbruster, Karla (2012). The Bioregional Imagination: Literature, Ecology, and Place. University of Georgia Press. p. 230. ISBN 978-0-8203-4367-9. Archived from the original on March 8, 2024. Retrieved June 16, 2019.
^ Kunzru, Hari (July 3, 2015). "Dune, 50 years on: how a science fiction novel changed the world". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Archived from the original on February 11, 2019. Retrieved February 11, 2019.
^ Hammond, Joseph (October 18, 2021). "Dune novels draw on Islamic motifs and have in turn inspired Muslim artists". Religion News Service. ISSN 0190-8286. Archived from the original on November 6, 2021. Retrieved October 31, 2021.
^ Determann, Jörg Matthias (2021). Islam, science fiction and extraterrestrial life : the culture of astrobiology in the Muslim world. London. p. 97. ISBN 978-0-7556-0130-1. OCLC 1197808773. Archived from the original on March 8, 2024. Retrieved November 20, 2021.{{cite book}}: CS1 maint: location missing publisher (link)
^ "Vertex Interviews Frank Herbert" (Interview). Vol. 1, no. 4. Interviewed by Paul Turner. October 1973. Archived from the original on May 19, 2009. Retrieved November 24, 2013.
^ Herbert, Brian (1965). "Afterword by Brian Herbert". Dune. By Herbert, Frank (Amazon Kindle ed.). Penguin Group. p. 878. ISBN 978-1-101658-05-5.
^ Simon, Olivier. "Tolk de Chakobsa Phrases in Dune". Conlangs Monthly: 31. Archived from the original on March 4, 2016. Retrieved March 15, 2024.
^ "Tim O'Reilly - Frank Herbert: Chapter 3: From Concept to Fable - O'Reilly Media". oreilly.com. Archived from the original on May 28, 2023. Retrieved November 7, 2021.
^ Collins, Will (September 16, 2017). "The Secret History of Dune". Los Angeles Review of Books. Archived from the original on October 21, 2017. Retrieved October 20, 2017.
^ "Tim O'Reilly - Frank Herbert: Chapter 5: Rogue Gods - O'Reilly Media". oreilly.com. Archived from the original on November 7, 2021. Retrieved November 7, 2021.
^ Archived at Ghostarchive and the Wayback Machine: Herbert, Frank (April 17, 1985). "Frank Herbert speaking at UCLA 4/17/1985". YouTube. University of California, Los Angeles Comm Studies.
^ a b James, Edward; Mendlesohn, Farah (2003). The Cambridge Companion to Science Fiction. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. pp. 183–184. ISBN 978-0-521-01657-5.
^ Herbert, Frank (1987). The maker of Dune : insights of a master of science fiction. Tim O'Reilly. New York: Berkley Books. p. 249. ISBN 978-0-425-09785-4. OCLC 15636296.
^ Brand, Stewart (1968). Whole Earth Catalog. p. 41.
^ France, Robert L., ed. (2005). Facilitating Watershed Management: Fostering Awareness and Stewardship. Lanham: Rowman & Littlefield Publishers. p. 105. ISBN 978-0-7425-3364-6.
^ Berry, Michael (August 13, 2015). "Dune, climate fiction pioneer: The ecological lessons of Frank Herbert's sci-fi masterpiece were ahead of its time". Salon. Archived from the original on October 29, 2021. Retrieved October 29, 2021.
^ Frelik, Paweł (2017). "'On Not Calling a Spade a Spade': Climate Fiction as Science Fiction". American Studies. 62 (1): 125–129.
^ Ower, John (1974). "Idea and Imagery in Herbert's Dune". Extrapolation. 15 (2): 129–139. doi:10.3828/extr.1974.15.2.129. Archived from the original on May 31, 2024. Retrieved September 19, 2021.
^ Rogers, Brett M. (2018). "'Now Harkonnen Shall Kill Harkonnen': Aeschylus, Dynastic Violence, and Twofold Tragedies in Frank Herbert's Dune". In Kennedy, Rebecca Futo (ed.). Brill's Companion to the Reception of Aeschylus. Brill.
^ DiTommaso, Lorenzo (2007). "The Articulation of Imperial Decadence and Decline in Epic Science Fiction". Extrapolation. 48 (2): 267–291. doi:10.3828/extr.2007.48.2.5. Archived from the original on May 31, 2024. Retrieved September 19, 2021.
^ Walter, Norman (1950). The Sexual Cycle of Human Warfare. Archived from the original on April 12, 2019. Retrieved June 28, 2019 – via gwern.net.
^ Herbert, Frank (December 1973). "Listening To The Left Hand". Harper's. Archived from the original on June 16, 2019. Retrieved June 28, 2019 – via jacurutu.com.
^ a b Kennedy, Kara (2021). Women's Agency in the Dune Universe: Tracing Women's Liberation through Science Fiction. Switzerland: Palgrave Macmillan. pp. 124, 131. ISBN 978-3-030-89204-3.
^ a b c Kennedy, Kara (September 8, 2021). "Frank Herbert, the Bene Gesserit, and the Complexity of Women in the World of Dune". Tor.com. Archived from the original on October 21, 2021.
^ Semler, Stephanie (2011). Nicholas, Jeffery (ed.). Dune and Philosophy: Weirding Way of the Mentat. Popular Culture and Philosophy. Chicago: Open Court. p. 17. ISBN 978-0-8126-9715-5. OCLC 663953010. Archived from the original on May 31, 2024. Retrieved May 4, 2024.
^ McReynolds, Leigha High (2022). "Locations of Deviance: A Eugenics Reading of Dune". In Nardi, Dominic J.; Brierly, N. Trevor (eds.). Discovering Dune: Essays on Frank Herbert's Epic Saga. Jefferson, North Carolina: McFarland. pp. 145–155. ISBN 978-1-4766-8201-3.
^ Kennedy, Kara (2022). Frank Herbert's Dune: A Critical Companion. Palgrave Science Fiction and Fantasy: A New Canon. Switzerland: Palgrave Macmillan. pp. 80–84. ISBN 978-3-031-13934-5.
^ Schwartz, Susan (2014). "A Teaching Review of Dune: Religion is the Spice of Life". Implicit Religion. 17 (4): 533–538. doi:10.1558/imre.v17i4.533.
^ a b c Miller, David M. (1980). Frank Herbert. Starmont House.
^ O'Reilly, Timothy (1981). Frank Herbert. Frederick Ungar Publishing. ISBN 978-0-8044-2666-4.
^ a b Herbert, Frank (July 1980). "Dune Genesis". Omni. FrankHerbert.org. Archived from the original on January 7, 2012. Retrieved February 14, 2014.
^ Herbert liner notes quoted in Touponce p. 24
^ Palumbo, Donald (1998). "The Monomyth as Fractal Pattern in Frank Herbert's Dune Novels". Science Fiction Studies. 25: 433–458.
^ Tilley, E. Allen. "The Modes of Fiction: A Plot Morphology." College English. (Feb 1978) 39.6 pp. 692–706.
^ Hume, Kathryn. "Romance: A Perdurable Pattern." College English. (Oct 1974) 36.2 pp. 129–146.
^ Attebery, Brian. Decoding Gender in Science Fiction. New York: Routledge, 2002. p. 66 ISBN 978-0-415-93949-2
^ Clareson, Thomas (1992). Understanding Contemporary American Science Fiction: the Formative Period. Columbia: University of South Carolina Press. pp. 169–172. ISBN 978-0-87249-870-9.
^ Herbert, Frank (1985). "Introduction". Eye. Berkley Books. ISBN 978-0-425-08398-7.
^ Prieto-Pablos, Juan A. (Spring 1991). "The Ambivalent Hero of Contemporary Fantasy and Science Fiction". Extrapolation. 32 (1). The University of Texas at Brownsville: 64–80. doi:10.3828/extr.1991.32.1.64.
^ a b c O'Reilly, Tim. "Chapter 2: Under Pressure". Frank Herbert. Archived from the original on December 30, 2007. Retrieved March 26, 2019 – via oreilly.com.
^ "Unpublished interview with Frank Herbert and Professor Willis E. McNelly". February 3, 1969. Archived from the original on February 13, 2002. Retrieved March 21, 2019 – via sinanvural.com.
^ Touponce (1988). "Life and Intellectual Background". Frank Herbert. Twayne Publishers. p. 10. ISBN 978-0-8057-7514-3.
^ a b Herbert, Brian (1965). "Afterword by Brian Herbert". Dune. By Herbert, Frank (Amazon Kindle ed.). Penguin Group. p. 873. ISBN 978-1-101658-05-5.
^ Herbert, Frank (February 3, 1969). "Interview with Dr. Willis E. McNelly". Sinanvural.com. Archived from the original on February 13, 2002. Retrieved January 26, 2010. During my studies of deserts, of course, and previous studies of religions, we all know that many religions began in a desert atmosphere, so I decided to put the two together because I don't think that any one story should have any one thread. I build on a layer technique, and of course putting in religion and religious ideas you can play one against the other.
^ a b c O'Reilly, Tim. "Chapter 5: Rogue Gods". Frank Herbert. Archived from the original on November 7, 2021. Retrieved May 15, 2020 – via oreilly.com.
^ Grigsby, John L. (1981). "Asimov's "Foundation" Trilogy and Herbert's "Dune" Trilogy: A Vision Reversed (La Trilogie de "Fondation" chez Asimov et la trilogie de "Dune" chez Herbert: une vision inversée)". Science Fiction Studies. 8 (2): 149–155. ISSN 0091-7729. JSTOR 4239405. Archived from the original on October 30, 2021. Retrieved October 14, 2021.
^ Riggs, Don (1988). "Future and "Progress" in Foundation and Dune". In Palumbo, Donald (ed.). Spectrum of the Fantastic: Selected Essays from the Sixth International Conference on the Fantastic in the Arts. Greenwood Press. ISBN 978-0-313-25502-1.
^ "The Hugo Awards: 1966". TheHugoAwards.org. World Science Fiction Society. July 26, 2007. Archived from the original on May 16, 2019. Retrieved March 8, 2011.
^ "1965 Nebula Awards". NebulaAwards.com. Archived from the original on December 17, 2005. Retrieved March 17, 2010.
^ Johansson, Frans (2004). The Medici effect: breakthrough insights at the intersection of ideas, concepts, and cultures. Boston, Mass: Harvard Business School Press. p. 78. ISBN 978-1-59139-186-9.
^ "Frank Herbert". Macmillan. Archived from the original on January 12, 2016. Retrieved April 9, 2019. Today the novel is more popular than ever ... It has been translated into dozens of languages and has sold almost 20 million copies
^ Touponce, William F. (1988). "Herbert's Reputation". Frank Herbert. Boston, MA: Twayne Publishers imprint, G. K. Hall & Co. p. 119. ISBN 978-0-8057-7514-3. Locus ran a poll of readers on April 15, 1975, in which Dune 'was voted the all-time best science-fiction novel ... It has sold over ten million copies in numerous editions.'
^ a b c d Herbert, Frank (August 2, 2005). Dune 40th Anniversary Edition: Editorial Reviews. Penguin. ISBN 978-0-441-01359-3. Archived from the original on May 31, 2024. Retrieved January 26, 2010 – via Amazon.com.
^ a b c d Herbert, Frank (1976). "Praise for the Dune Chronicles". Children of Dune (2008 ed.). Penguin Publishing Group. ISBN 978-1-4406-3051-4. Archived from the original on April 8, 2023. Retrieved May 24, 2020.
^ Budrys, Algis (April 1966). "Galaxy Bookshelf". Galaxy Science Fiction. pp. 67–75.
^ Sagan, Carl (May 28, 1978). "Growing up with Science Fiction". The New York Times. p. SM7. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on December 11, 2018. Retrieved December 12, 2018.
^ Hladik, Tamara I. "Classic Sci-Fi Reviews: Dune". SciFi.com. Archived from the original on April 20, 2008. Retrieved April 20, 2008.
^ "100 'most inspiring' novels revealed by BBC Arts". BBC News. November 5, 2019. Archived from the original on November 8, 2019. Retrieved November 10, 2019. The reveal kickstarts the BBC's year-long celebration of literature.
^ Cilli, Oronzo 2019, Tolkien's Library: An Annotated Checklist. Luna Press Publishing (August 8, 2019)
^ "Frank Herbert: Dune First Edition. (Philadelphia: Chilton Books, | Lot #26228". Heritage Auctions. Archived from the original on November 13, 2020. Retrieved March 9, 2019.
^ "Remembering Science Fiction Author Frank Herbert: Highlighting His Archives In the Pollak Library". California State University, Fullerton. February 27, 2014. Archived from the original on October 28, 2014. Retrieved October 28, 2014.
^ "Frank Herbert, author of sci-fi best sellers, dies". Pittsburgh Post-Gazette. February 13, 1986. Archived from the original on February 16, 2024. Retrieved July 27, 2009.
^ Quinn, Judy (November 17, 1997). "Bantam Pays $3M for Dune Prequels by Herbert's Son". Publishers Weekly. Archived from the original on March 4, 2016. Retrieved February 6, 2014.
^ a b Kurchak, Sarah (October 20, 2021). "Why Frank Herbert's Dune Has Proved So Hard to Adapt". Time. Archived from the original on October 20, 2021. Retrieved October 31, 2021. Lynch's Dune was widely panned in its time.
^ "Spice World: WIRED Traces the Dune Legacy". Wired. September 28, 2021. Archived from the original on September 28, 2021. Retrieved September 28, 2021.
^ Child, Ben (August 27, 2021). "Will Denis Villeneuve's Dune finally succeed where others failed?". The Guardian. Archived from the original on August 27, 2021. Retrieved September 28, 2021.
^ "Dune: Book to Screen Timeline". Duneinfo.com. Archived from the original on May 17, 2011. Retrieved January 18, 2013.
^ a b c d e f g h Jodorowsky, Alejandro (1985). "Dune: Le Film Que Vous Ne Verrez Jamais (Dune: The Film You Will Never See)". Métal Hurlant. DuneInfo.com. Archived from the original on February 21, 2019. Retrieved February 8, 2014.
^ Chris Cutler, book included with Henry Cow 40th Anniversary CD box set (2008)
^ Falk, Gaby (ed). HR GIGER Arh+. Taschen, 2001, p.52
^ Kalder, Daniel (January 25, 2011). "Alejandro Jodorowsky's dance on the edge of meaning". The Guardian. Retrieved July 28, 2020.
^ "The Visualists: Direction and Design", The Beast Within: The Making of Alien.
^ McIntee, David (2005). Beautiful Monsters: The Unofficial and Unauthorized Guide to the Alien and Predator Films. Surrey: Telos Publishing. p. 27. ISBN 978-1-903889-94-7.
^ Evry, Max (December 13, 2024). "Ridley Scott's Lost Dune Script Found: 'I Don't Think It Would've Made Fans Happy'". IGN. Retrieved December 13, 2024.
^ Cinefantastique, September 1984 (Vol 14, No 4 & 5 – Double issue).
^ Harmetz, Aljean (September 4, 1983). "The World Of 'Dune' Is Filmed In Mexico". The New York Times. Archived from the original on November 1, 2021. Retrieved October 31, 2021.
^ a b Fye, Eleanor (June 8, 2020). "The Story of Dune, David Lynch, and Hollywood's Most Notorious Pseudonym". Gizmodo. Archived from the original on September 29, 2021. Retrieved October 31, 2021.
^ Rozen, Leah (June 25, 1984). "With Another Best-Seller and An Upcoming Film, Dune Is Busting Out All Over For Frank Herbert". People. pp. 129–130. Archived from the original on March 3, 2016. Retrieved March 21, 2010.
^ Feeney, Mark. "Screen of dreams." The Boston Globe. (December 16, 2007) p. N12.
^ "The Messy, Misunderstood Glory of David Lynch's Dune". The Atlantic. March 14, 2014. Archived from the original on March 14, 2014. Retrieved October 31, 2021. The deeply flawed film version of Frank Herbert's novel was universally hated when it premiered 30 years ago...
^ Oleksinski, Johnny (October 21, 2021). "David Lynch's 1984 'Dune' is still the stuff of migraines". New York Post. Archived from the original on October 21, 2021. Retrieved October 31, 2021.
^ "Dune". Metacritic. Archived from the original on October 5, 2021. Retrieved October 30, 2021.
^ Kevin J. Anderson Interview ~ DigitalWebbing.com (2004) Internet Archive, July 3, 2007.
^ a b c Siegel, Tatiana (March 18, 2008). "Berg to direct Dune for Paramount". Variety. Archived from the original on February 15, 2019. Retrieved February 15, 2019.
^ Neuman, Clayton (August 17, 2009). "Winds of Dune Author Brian Herbert on Flipping the Myth of Jihad". AMCtv.com. Archived from the original on September 21, 2009. Retrieved August 19, 2009.
^ Roush, George (December 1, 2009). "Special Preview: El Guapo Spends A Day On A Navy Destroyer For Peter Berg's Battleship!". LatinoReview.com. Archived from the original on June 28, 2017. Retrieved January 5, 2010.
^ Rowles, Dustin (October 27, 2009). "Pajiba Exclusive: An Update on the Dune Remake". Pajiba.com. Archived from the original on October 30, 2009. Retrieved January 5, 2010.
^ Sperling, Nicole (January 4, 2010). "Dune remake back on track with director Pierre Morel". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on January 14, 2010. Retrieved January 5, 2010.
^ Dune Remake Lands New Screenwriter Archived August 10, 2011, at the Wayback Machine, Screen Crave, February 11, 2010
^ Fleming, Mike (November 8, 2010). "Sands of Time Running Out For New Dune". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on December 22, 2010. Retrieved December 27, 2010.
^ Reynolds, Simon (March 23, 2011). "Dune remake dropped by Paramount". Digital Spy. Archived from the original on September 24, 2015. Retrieved March 24, 2011.
^ Busch, Anita (November 21, 2016). "Legendary Acquires Frank Herbert's Classic Sci-Fi Novel Dune For Film And TV". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on December 22, 2016. Retrieved November 27, 2016.
^ Kroll, Justin (November 21, 2016). "Legendary Lands Rights to Classic Sci-Fi Novel Dune". Variety. Archived from the original on December 22, 2016. Retrieved November 27, 2016.
^ Kroll, Justin (December 21, 2016). "Blade Runner 2049 Helmer Denis Villeneuve Eyed to Direct Dune Reboot". Variety. Archived from the original on December 22, 2016. Retrieved December 21, 2016.
^ Watters, Bill (February 1, 2017). "It's Official: The Dune Reboot Has Found Its Director". Bleeding Cool. Archived from the original on January 7, 2019. Retrieved February 1, 2017.
^ Kroll, Justin (April 5, 2017). "Forrest Gump Writer Eric Roth to Pen Denis Villeneuve's Dune Reboot". Variety. Archived from the original on February 15, 2019. Retrieved July 21, 2017.
^ Hughes, William (March 9, 2018). "Denis Villeneuve says he's now making two Dune movies, actually". The A.V. Club. Archived from the original on May 28, 2023. Retrieved September 28, 2018.
^ Colburn, Randall (September 27, 2018). "Dune star Timothée Chalamet also loves the David Lynch version". The A.V. Club. Archived from the original on September 27, 2018. Retrieved September 28, 2018.
^ Kit, Borys (January 9, 2019). "Stellan Skarsgard to Play Villain in Legendary's Dune". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on April 17, 2021. Retrieved January 9, 2019.
^ Kit, Borys (September 5, 2018). "Rebecca Ferguson in Talks to Star in Denis Villeneuve's Dune". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on September 6, 2018. Retrieved January 16, 2019.
^ Kit, Borys (January 15, 2019). "Charlotte Rampling Joins Timothee Chalamet in Dune". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on January 30, 2019. Retrieved January 16, 2019.
^ Kit, Borys; Couch, Aaron (January 29, 2019). "Oscar Isaac Joining Denis Villeneuve's Dune". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on January 30, 2019. Retrieved January 30, 2019.
^ Galuppo, Mia (January 30, 2019). "Zendaya Circling Denis Villeneuve's Dune". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on January 31, 2019. Retrieved January 30, 2019.
^ Kroll, Justin (February 1, 2019). "Javier Bardem Joins Timothee Chalamet in Dune Reboot". Variety. Archived from the original on February 1, 2019. Retrieved February 1, 2019.
^ Kroll, Justin (February 13, 2019). "Josh Brolin Joins Timothee Chalamet in Star-Studded Dune Reboot". Variety. Archived from the original on February 14, 2019. Retrieved February 13, 2019.
^ Kroll, Justin (February 14, 2019). "Jason Momoa Joins Timothee Chalamet, Javier Bardem in Dune Reboot". Variety. Archived from the original on February 15, 2019. Retrieved February 14, 2019.
^ N'Duka, Amanda (February 19, 2019). "Legendary's Dune Film Adds Ant-Man and the Wasp Actor David Dastmalchian". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on February 20, 2019. Retrieved February 19, 2019.
^ Couch, Aaron (March 17, 2019). "Chang Chen Joining Denis Villeneuve's Dune". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on March 19, 2019. Retrieved March 17, 2019.
^ Breznican, Anthony (April 14, 2020). "Behold Dune: An Exclusive Look at Timothée Chalamet, Zendaya, Oscar Isaac, and More". Vanity Fair. Archived from the original on April 14, 2020. Retrieved April 14, 2020.
^ Vivarelli, Nick (May 14, 2021). "Venice Fest Prepares to Roll Out Red Carpet for Full-Fledged Physical Edition (Exclusive)". Variety. Archived from the original on May 14, 2021. Retrieved May 14, 2021.
^ Bankhurst, Adam (October 17, 2021). "Dune Set to Premiere on HBO Max One Day Early". IGN. Archived from the original on October 18, 2021. Retrieved October 17, 2021.
^ Sharf, Zack (May 18, 2021). "Dune Release Confusion: Warner Bros. Says Denis Villeneuve's Epic Still Set for HBO Max Plan". IndieWire. Archived from the original on May 18, 2021. Retrieved May 18, 2021.
^ "Dune: Part One". Metacritic. Archived from the original on October 26, 2021. Retrieved October 30, 2021.
^ "AFI's Top Films and TV of 2021 Include Dune, Power of the Dog, and Succession". December 8, 2021. Archived from the original on January 21, 2022. Retrieved January 21, 2022.
^ Spry, Jeff (March 28, 2022). "Dune wins 6 Oscars at Academy Awards". Space.com. Archived from the original on March 31, 2022. Retrieved March 31, 2022.
^ "Dune: Part Two Trailer Promises More Action than Ever Before – The MuseVille". May 3, 2023. Archived from the original on May 12, 2023. Retrieved May 12, 2023.
^ "'Dune: Part Two' Delayed to 2024 Amid Strikes". August 24, 2023. Archived from the original on August 25, 2023. Retrieved August 25, 2023.
^ Roberts, Adam (2000). Science Fiction. New York: Routledge. pp. 85–90. ISBN 978-0-415-19204-0.
^ Bardinelli, John (April 30, 2015). "Dune at 50: Pop Culture Is Hooked on Spice". Barnes & Noble. Archived from the original on September 16, 2020. Retrieved April 13, 2020.
^ McCarthy, Helen (1999). Hayao Miyazaki Master of Japanese Animation. Stone Bridge Press. pp. 72–92. ISBN 978-1-880656-41-9.
^ "Hayao Miyazaki. Exploring the early work of Japan's greatest animator | IIAS". iias.asia. Archived from the original on October 31, 2021. Retrieved September 20, 2021.
^ "10 Behind-The-Scenes Facts About Nausicaä of the Valley of the Wind". ScreenRant. June 10, 2020. Archived from the original on September 20, 2021. Retrieved September 20, 2021.
^ "NAUSICAA & DUNE (JAPANESE ANIMATION NEWS & REVIEW, 7/91)". nausicaa.net. Archived from the original on November 27, 2021. Retrieved September 20, 2021.
^ Dazed (September 17, 2021). "How Dune inspired Hayao Miyazaki's Nausicaa of the Valley of the Wind". Dazed. Archived from the original on September 19, 2021. Retrieved September 20, 2021.
^ Touponce (1988). "Herbert's Reputation". Frank Herbert. Twayne Publishers. p. 119. ISBN 978-0-8057-7514-3.
^ "David Matthews - Dune". Discogs. 1977. Archived from the original on November 17, 2023. Retrieved November 17, 2023.
^ "Richard Pinhas – Chronolyse". Discogs. September 21, 1978. Archived from the original on March 12, 2017. Retrieved March 9, 2017.
^ "Klaus Schulze – Dune". Discogs. September 21, 1979. Archived from the original on March 12, 2017. Retrieved March 9, 2017.
^ "Zed (5) – Visions Of Dune". Discogs. September 21, 1979.
^ "Booklet CD Eros" (in English and French). Soleil Zeuhl. 2000. Archived from the original on May 31, 2024. Retrieved April 10, 2024.
^ Wall, Mick (2004). Iron Maiden: Run to the Hills, the Authorised Biography (3rd ed.). Sanctuary Publishing. p. 244. ISBN 978-1-86074-542-3.
^ "Interview: Matt Fox (Shai Hulud, Zombie Apocalypse)". noecho.net. October 25, 2016. Archived from the original on September 20, 2020. Retrieved May 8, 2024.
^ Schultz, Chris (February 18, 2023). "Twenty-one years ago, Shihad changed their name. Then all hell broke loose". The Spinoff. Retrieved January 17, 2025.
^ St. James Encyclopedia of Pop Culture by Craig T. Cobane Retrieved July 12, 2008.
^ Has Dune inspired other music? – Stason.org Archived June 16, 2017, at the Wayback Machine Retrieved July 12, 2008.
^ Album Fear is the Mindkiller by Burton C. Bell, Dino Cazares Retrieved September 10, 2020.
^ "Matthew Good Near Fantastica Lyrics". Justsomelyrics.com. Archived from the original on November 4, 2015. Retrieved August 29, 2012.
^ Kreps, Daniel (May 12, 2022). "Christopher Walken Cast in Dune: Part Two, Just as Fatboy Slim Prophesied". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on March 17, 2024. Retrieved March 17, 2024.
^ "Golem lyrics and info: The 2nd Moon (1999)". Golem-metal.de. Archived from the original on December 21, 2016. Retrieved July 10, 2009.
^ Lowachee, Karin (2003). "Space, symbols, and synth-rock imbue the metaphoric musical world of 30 Seconds To Mars". Mars Dust. Mysterian Media. Archived from the original on October 22, 2006.
^ "Re-Direct". Youngblood Brass Band. Archived from the original on September 29, 2000. Retrieved August 29, 2012.
^ Perry, Kevin EG (December 4, 2015). "Our Album Of The Year Winner Grimes – The Full NME Cover Feature". NME. IPC Media. Archived from the original on April 7, 2023. Retrieved September 6, 2016.
^ Aroesti, Rachel (October 31, 2015). "Grimes: 'In my life, I'm a lot more weird than this'". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Archived from the original on September 16, 2020. Retrieved June 22, 2017.
^ Tendrills (2015). "10,191 by Tendrills". Archived from the original on February 20, 2024. Retrieved February 20, 2024.
^ "Kenshi Yonezu/Hachi - Sand Planet". CUT Magazine. September 22, 2017. Archived from the original on September 2, 2022. Retrieved September 26, 2022.
^ Sleep (2018). The Sciences (vinyl liner notes). Third Man Records. TMR 547.
^ Hermes, Will (September 4, 2019). "Tool Return From a Long Hiatus With Fear Inoculum". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on January 9, 2022. Retrieved September 15, 2019.
^ Sharples, Grant (October 7, 2021). "Shannon Lay Is Doing This for Herself". Spin. Archived from the original on October 7, 2021. Retrieved October 8, 2021.
^ Loguidice, Bill; Barton, Matt (2012). "Spicing Up Strategy in Real Time". Vintage Games: An Insider Look at the History of Grand Theft Auto, Super Mario, and the Most Influential Games of All Time. CRC Press. pp. 65–76. ISBN 978-1-136-13758-7. Archived from the original on March 8, 2024. Retrieved April 14, 2020.
^ Shah, Rawn; Romine, James (1995). Playing MUDs on the Internet. John Wiley & Sons, Inc. p. 213. ISBN 978-0-471-11633-2.
^ D'Onofrio, Matthew (March 23, 2021). "Enter The Gungeon: 10 Best Active Items That You Need To Find". Game Rant. Archived from the original on June 14, 2022. Retrieved June 14, 2022.
^ Duffy, Owen (December 11, 2015). "Blood, dice and darkness: how Warhammer defined gaming for a generation". Archived from the original on May 18, 2016.
^ "Dune Awakening". Dune Awakening. Archived from the original on September 27, 2023. Retrieved September 27, 2023.
^ Green, Jake (August 3, 2023). "Dune Awakening - everything we know so far". TechRadar. Archived from the original on September 28, 2023. Retrieved September 28, 2023.
^ Mercante, Alyssa (October 7, 2022). "Dune Awakening: Everything we know so far about the open-world Dune MMO". gamesradar.com. Contributed Jasmine Gould-Wilson, Heather Wald, Emma-Jane Betts, Josh West. Archived from the original on September 28, 2023. Retrieved September 28, 2023.
^ Herbert, Brian (2004). Dreamer of Dune: The Biography of Frank Herbert. Macmillan. p. 244. ISBN 978-0-7653-0646-3.
^ "Gazetteer of Planetary Nomenclature: Dune on Moon". Planetarynames.wr.usgs.gov. Archived from the original on December 11, 2016. Retrieved October 16, 2016.
^ Blue, Jennifer (August 4, 2009). "USGS Astrogeology Hot Topics: New Name, Descriptor Term, and Theme Approved for Use on Titan". Astrogeology.usgs.gov. Archived from the original on November 1, 2014. Retrieved September 8, 2010.
^ "Gazetteer of Planetary Nomenclature: Titan Planitiae". Planetarynames.wr.usgs.gov. Archived from the original on October 16, 2011. Retrieved January 3, 2015.
^ "Gazetteer of Planetary Nomenclature: Titan Labyrinthi". Planetarynames.wr.usgs.gov. Archived from the original on October 16, 2011. Retrieved January 3, 2015.


## Further reading
Britt, Ryan (2023). The Spice Must Flow. Penguin Random House LLC. ISBN 9780593472996.
Clute, John; Nicholls, Peter (1995). The Encyclopedia of Science Fiction. New York: St. Martin's Press. p. 1386. ISBN 978-0-312-13486-0.
Clute, John; Nicholls, Peter (1995). The Multimedia Encyclopedia of Science Fiction (CD-ROM). Danbury, CT: Grolier. ISBN 978-0-7172-3999-3.
Decker, Kevin S., ed. Dune and Philosophy: Minds, Monads, and Muad'Dib. Hoboken, NJ/Oxford: Wiley-Blackwell, 2023.
Huddleston, Tom (2023). The Worlds of Dune: The Places and Cultures That Inspired Frank Herbert. Minneapolis, MN: Quarto Publishing Group UK.
Jakubowski, Maxim; Edwards, Malcolm (1983). The Complete Book of Science Fiction and Fantasy Lists. St Albans, Herts., UK: Granada Publishing Ltd. p. 350. ISBN 978-0-586-05678-3.
Kennedy, Kara (2022). Frank Herbert's Dune: A Critical Companion. Cham, Switzerland: Palgrave Macmillan.
Kennedy, Kara (2020). Women's Agency in the Dune Universe: Tracing Women's Liberation through Science Fiction. Cham, Switzerland: Palgrave Macmillan.
Nardi, Dominic J.; Brierly, N. Trevor, eds. (2022). Discovering Dune: Essays on Frank Herbert's Epic Saga. Jefferson, NC: McFarland & Co.
Nicholas, Jeffery, ed. (2011). Dune and Philosophy: Weirding Way of Mentat. Chicago: Open Court.
Nicholls, Peter (1979). The Encyclopedia of Science Fiction. St Albans, Herts., UK: Granada Publishing Ltd. p. 672. ISBN 978-0-586-05380-5.
O'Reilly, Timothy (1981). Frank Herbert. New York: Frederick Ungar.
Pringle, David (1990). The Ultimate Guide to Science Fiction. London: Grafton Books Ltd. p. 407. ISBN 978-0-246-13635-0.
Tuck, Donald H. (1974). The Encyclopedia of Science Fiction and Fantasy. Chicago: Advent. p. 136. ISBN 978-0-911682-20-5.
Williams, Kevin C. (2013). The Wisdom of the Sand: Philosophy and Frank Herbert's Dune. New York: Hampton Press.


## External links
Official website for Dune and its sequels
Dune title listing at the Internet Speculative Fiction Database
Turner, Paul (October 1973). "Vertex Interviews Frank Herbert" (Interview). Vol. 1, no. 4. Archived from the original on May 19, 2009.
Spark Notes: Dune, detailed study guide
DuneQuotes.com – Collection of quotes from the Dune series
Dune by Frank Herbert, reviewed by Ted Gioia (Conceptual Fiction)
"Frank Herbert Biography and Bibliography at LitWeb.net". litweb.net. Archived from the original on April 2, 2009. Retrieved January 2, 2009.
Timberg, Scott (April 18, 2010). "Frank Herbert's Dune holds timely – and timeless – appeal". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on December 3, 2013. Retrieved November 27, 2013.
Walton, Jo (January 12, 2011). "In league with the future: Frank Herbert's Dune (Review)". Tor.com. Retrieved November 27, 2013.
Leonard, Andrew (June 4, 2015). "To Save California, Read Dune". Nautilus. Archived from the original on November 4, 2017. Retrieved June 15, 2015.
Dune by Frank Herbert – Foreshadowing & Dedication at Fact Behind Fiction
Frank Herbert by Tim O'Reilly
DuneScholar.com – Collection of scholarly essays
v
t
e
Brian Herbert
Kevin J. Anderson
Dune (1965)
Dune Messiah (1969)
Children of Dune (1976)
God Emperor of Dune (1981)
Heretics of Dune (1984)
Chapterhouse: Dune (1985)
House Atreides (1999)
House Harkonnen (2000)
House Corrino (2001)
The Butlerian Jihad (2002)
The Machine Crusade (2003)
The Battle of Corrin (2004)
Paul of Dune (2008)
The Winds of Dune (2009)
Sisterhood of Dune (2012)
Mentats of Dune (2014)
Navigators of Dune (2016)
The Duke of Caladan (2020)
The Lady of Caladan (2021)
The Heir of Caladan (2022)
Hunters of Dune (2006)
Sandworms of Dune (2007)
Dune (1984) soundtrack
soundtrack
Dune (2021) soundtracks accolades
soundtracks
accolades
Part Two (2024) soundtrack accolades
soundtrack
accolades
Part Three (2026)
Frank Herbert's Dune (2000)
Frank Herbert's Children of Dune (2003)
Prophecy (2024)
Dune
Dune II
Dune 2000
Emperor: Battle for Dune
Frank Herbert's Dune
Spice Wars
Awakening
Board game
Imperium
Card game
Chronicles of the Imperium
The Dune Encyclopedia (1984)
National Lampoon's Doon (1984)
Short stories (1985–2022)
Songs of Muad'Dib (1992)
Dreamer of Dune (2003)
The Road to Dune (2005)
The Science of Dune (2007)
Jodorowsky's Dune (2013)
Head-Space (2016)
Lego Dune (2024–present)
Bene Gesserit
Fremen
Spacing Guild
Alia Atreides
Leto II Atreides
Paul Atreides
Chani
Count Fenring
Margot Fenring
Feyd-Rautha
Gurney Halleck
Valya Harkonnen
Vladimir Harkonnen
Duncan Idaho
Princess Irulan
Lady Jessica
Gaius Helen Mohiam
Prophecy characters
Arrakis
Spice
Sandworm
Technology
Glossary
Category
v
t
e
Bibliography
Dune (1965)
Dune Messiah (1969)
Children of Dune (1976)
God Emperor of Dune (1981)
Heretics of Dune (1984)
Chapterhouse: Dune (1985)
"The Road to Dune" (1985)
Songs of Muad'Dib (1992)
The Road to Dune (2005)
"A Matter of Traces" (1958)
"The Tactful Saboteur" (1964)
Whipping Star (1970)
The Dosadi Experiment (1977)
Destination: Void (1966)
The Jesus Incident (1979)
The Lazarus Effect (1983)
The Ascension Factor (1988)
The Dragon in the Sea (1956)
The Green Brain (1966)
The Eyes of Heisenberg (1966)
The Heaven Makers (1968)
The Santaroga Barrier (1968)
Soul Catcher (1972)
The Godmakers (1972)
Hellstrom's Hive (1973)
The Dosadi Experiment (1977)
Direct Descent (1980)
The White Plague (1982)
Man of Two Worlds (1986)
High-Opp (2012)
Angels' Fall (2013)
A Game of Authors (2013)
A Thorn in the Bush (2014)
The Worlds of Frank Herbert (1970)
The Book of Frank Herbert (1973)
The Best of Frank Herbert (1975)
The Priests of Psi (1980)
Eye (1985)
The Collected Stories of Frank Herbert (2014)
v
t
e
The Sword in the Stone by T. H. White (1939)
Slan by A. E. van Vogt (1941)
Beyond This Horizon by Anson MacDonald (1943)
Conjure Wife by Fritz Leiber (1944)
Shadow Over Mars by Leigh Brackett (1945)
The Mule by Isaac Asimov (1946)
Farmer in the Sky by Robert A. Heinlein (1951)
Fahrenheit 451 by Ray Bradbury (1954)
The Demolished Man by Alfred Bester (1953)
They'd Rather Be Right (aka: The Forever Machine) by Mark Clifton and Frank Riley (1955)
Double Star by Robert A. Heinlein (1956)
The Big Time by Fritz Leiber (1958)
A Case of Conscience by James Blish (1959)
Starship Troopers by Robert A. Heinlein (1960)
A Canticle for Leibowitz by Walter M. Miller, Jr. (1961)
Stranger in a Strange Land by Robert A. Heinlein (1962)
The Man in the High Castle by Philip K. Dick (1963)
Here Gather the Stars (aka: Way Station) by Clifford D. Simak (1964)
The Wanderer by Fritz Leiber (1965)
Dune by Frank Herbert / ...And Call Me Conrad (aka: This Immortal) by Roger Zelazny (1966)
The Moon Is a Harsh Mistress by Robert A. Heinlein (1967)
Lord of Light by Roger Zelazny (1968)
Stand on Zanzibar by John Brunner (1969)
The Left Hand of Darkness by Ursula K. Le Guin (1970)
Ringworld by Larry Niven (1971)
To Your Scattered Bodies Go by Philip José Farmer (1972)
The Gods Themselves by Isaac Asimov (1973)
Rendezvous with Rama by Arthur C. Clarke (1974)
The Dispossessed by Ursula K. Le Guin (1975)
The Forever War by Joe Haldeman (1976)
Where Late the Sweet Birds Sang by Kate Wilhelm (1977)
Gateway by Frederik Pohl (1978)
Dreamsnake by Vonda N. McIntyre (1979)
The Fountains of Paradise by Arthur C. Clarke (1980)
The Snow Queen by Joan D. Vinge (1981)
Downbelow Station by C. J. Cherryh (1982)
Foundation's Edge by Isaac Asimov (1983)
Startide Rising by David Brin (1984)
Neuromancer by William Gibson (1985)
Ender's Game by Orson Scott Card (1986)
Speaker for the Dead by Orson Scott Card (1987)
The Uplift War by David Brin (1988)
Cyteen by C. J. Cherryh (1989)
Hyperion by Dan Simmons (1990)
The Vor Game by Lois McMaster Bujold (1991)
Barrayar by Lois McMaster Bujold (1992)
A Fire Upon the Deep by Vernor Vinge / Doomsday Book by Connie Willis (1993)
Green Mars by Kim Stanley Robinson (1994)
Mirror Dance by Lois McMaster Bujold (1995)
The Diamond Age by Neal Stephenson (1996)
Blue Mars by Kim Stanley Robinson (1997)
Forever Peace by Joe Haldeman (1998)
To Say Nothing of the Dog by Connie Willis (1999)
A Deepness in the Sky by Vernor Vinge (2000)
Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire by J. K. Rowling (2001)
American Gods by Neil Gaiman (2002)
Hominids by Robert J. Sawyer (2003)
Paladin of Souls by Lois McMaster Bujold (2004)
Jonathan Strange & Mr Norrell by Susanna Clarke (2005)
Spin by Robert Charles Wilson (2006)
Rainbows End by Vernor Vinge (2007)
The Yiddish Policemen's Union by Michael Chabon (2008)
The Graveyard Book by Neil Gaiman (2009)
The Windup Girl by Paolo Bacigalupi / The City & the City by China Miéville (2010)
Blackout/All Clear by Connie Willis (2011)
Among Others by Jo Walton (2012)
Redshirts by John Scalzi (2013)
Ancillary Justice by Ann Leckie (2014)
The Three-Body Problem by Cixin Liu, translated by Ken Liu (2015)
The Fifth Season by N. K. Jemisin (2016)
The Obelisk Gate by N. K. Jemisin (2017)
The Stone Sky by N. K. Jemisin (2018)
The Calculating Stars by Mary Robinette Kowal (2019)
A Memory Called Empire by Arkady Martine (2020)
Network Effect by Martha Wells (2021)
A Desolation Called Peace by Arkady Martine (2022)
Nettle & Bone by T. Kingfisher (2023)
Some Desperate Glory by Emily Tesh (2024)
v
t
e
Dune by Frank Herbert (1966)
Babel-17 by Samuel R. Delany / Flowers for Algernon by Daniel Keyes (1967)
The Einstein Intersection by Samuel R. Delany (1968)
Rite of Passage by Alexei Panshin (1969)
The Left Hand of Darkness by Ursula K. Le Guin (1970)
Ringworld by Larry Niven (1971)
A Time of Changes by Robert Silverberg (1972)
The Gods Themselves by Isaac Asimov (1973)
Rendezvous with Rama by Arthur C. Clarke (1974)
The Dispossessed by Ursula K. Le Guin (1975)
The Forever War by Joe Haldeman (1976)
Man Plus by Frederik Pohl (1977)
Gateway by Frederik Pohl (1978)
Dreamsnake by Vonda N. McIntyre (1979)
The Fountains of Paradise by Arthur C. Clarke (1980)
Timescape by Gregory Benford (1981)
The Claw of the Conciliator by Gene Wolfe (1982)
No Enemy But Time by Michael Bishop (1983)
Startide Rising by David Brin (1984)
Neuromancer by William Gibson (1985)
Ender's Game by Orson Scott Card (1986)
Speaker for the Dead by Orson Scott Card (1987)
The Falling Woman by Pat Murphy (1988)
Falling Free by Lois McMaster Bujold (1989)
The Healer's War by Elizabeth Ann Scarborough (1990)
Tehanu: The Last Book of Earthsea by Ursula K. Le Guin (1991)
Stations of the Tide by Michael Swanwick (1992)
Doomsday Book by Connie Willis (1993)
Red Mars by Kim Stanley Robinson (1994)
Moving Mars by Greg Bear (1995)
The Terminal Experiment by Robert J. Sawyer (1996)
Slow River by Nicola Griffith (1997)
The Moon and the Sun by Vonda N. McIntyre (1998)
Forever Peace by Joe Haldeman (1999)
Parable of the Talents by Octavia E. Butler (2000)
Darwin's Radio by Greg Bear (2001)
The Quantum Rose by Catherine Asaro (2002)
American Gods by Neil Gaiman (2003)
Speed of Dark by Elizabeth Moon (2004)
Paladin of Souls by Lois McMaster Bujold (2005)
Camouflage by Joe Haldeman (2006)
Seeker by Jack McDevitt (2007)
The Yiddish Policemen's Union by Michael Chabon (2008)
Powers by Ursula K. Le Guin (2009)
The Windup Girl by Paolo Bacigalupi (2010)
Blackout/All Clear by Connie Willis (2011)
Among Others by Jo Walton (2012)
2312 by Kim Stanley Robinson (2013)
Ancillary Justice by Ann Leckie (2014)
Annihilation by Jeff VanderMeer (2015)
Uprooted by Naomi Novik (2016)
All the Birds in the Sky by Charlie Jane Anders (2017)
The Stone Sky by N. K. Jemisin (2018)
The Calculating Stars by Mary Robinette Kowal (2019)
A Song for a New Day by Sarah Pinsker (2020)
Network Effect by Martha Wells (2021)
A Master of Djinn by P. Djèlí Clark (2022)
Babel, or the Necessity of Violence by R. F. Kuang (2023)
The Saint of Bright Doors by Vajra Chandrasekera (2024)
Someone You Can Build a Nest In by John Wiswell (2025)
VIAF
Germany
United States
Israel
IdRef
MusicBrainz work


URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Crystal_World
Content:

The Crystal World is a science fiction novel by English author J. G. Ballard, published in 1966.[1] The novel tells the story of a physician trying to make his way deep into the jungle to a secluded leprosy treatment facility. While trying to make it to his destination, his chaotic path leads him to try to come to terms with an apocalyptic phenomenon in the jungle that crystallises everything it touches.
Ballard previously used the theme of apocalyptic crystallisation in the 1964 short story "The Illuminated Man" (included in The Terminal Beach), which is also set in the same locations.


## Plot summary
The protagonist is Edward Sanders, an English medical doctor, who arrives at the river port of Port Matarre, in Cameroon. From here he tries to reach a leprosy treatment facility[2] where his friends, Max and Suzanne Clair, live. Soon, however, he starts to recognize that a mysterious phenomenon is crystallizing the jungle along with its living creatures.[3] The same phenomenon is reported to be present in the Florida everglades and in the Pripyat Marshes (Soviet Union) as well. Scientific explanations of the phenomenon are provided within the book: however, Ballard offers mostly an interior and psychological perspective about it, directly through Sanders' experiences. Several facts, furthermore, remain unexplained: for example, the ability of jewels to liquefy the crystals. The crystals also have the property to keep objects and beings in a suspended state of existence. Many passages deal with this characteristic, pointing out its capability to stop time and life.
In his route towards the deep of the forest, Sanders gets involved in a personal feud between Ventress, a Belgian architect, and Thorensen, the director of a diamond mine. In one of the most striking episodes of the novel, Sanders discovers the reason of the deadly rivalry to be Ventress' former wife, Serena, who is terminally ill with tuberculosis. After a final confrontation, Thorensen decides to remain in his house within the jungle, in spite of the encroaching crystallization process. Two of the other characters met by Sanders in his voyage spontaneously make the same decision: Balthus, an apostate priest, and Suzanne.[1] The latter, nearly gone mad and sporting the first symptoms of leprosy, is portrayed towards the end of the novel as the leader of a band of lepers who set for the interior of the crystallizing forest, clearly to never come back.
After having barely escaped from the now quickly spreading crystallization, Sanders reaches Port Matarre. Here, however, he makes the same decision as Balthus and Suzanne. In the final pages, Sanders goes back to the river to face the same fate as Suzanne.


## Reception
Richard A. Lupoff described The Crystal World as the best of Ballard's "catastrophe novels", saying it was "Idiosyncratic but highly effective [and] a very important science fiction book."[4]


## References
^ a b "1973 Perry-Wilkie analysis of the Crystal World".
^ "The Crystal World by JG Ballard – a petrified apocalypse". TheGuardian.com. 25 August 2015.
^ "The Crystal World". 4th Estate.
^ "Lupoff's Book Week", Algol 28, 1977, p.56.
Tuck, Donald H. (1974). The Encyclopedia of Science Fiction and Fantasy. Chicago: Advent. p. 28. ISBN 0-911682-20-1.


## External links
The Terminal Collection: JG Ballard First Editions
The Crystal World by J.G. Ballard, reviewed by Ted Gioia (Conceptual Fiction)
v
t
e
The Wind from Nowhere (1961)
The Drowned World (1962)
The Burning World (1964)
The Crystal World (1966)
The Atrocity Exhibition (1969)
Crash (1973)
Concrete Island (1974)
High-Rise (1975)
The Unlimited Dream Company (1979)
Hello America (1981)
Empire of the Sun (1984)
The Day of Creation (1987)
Running Wild (1988)
The Kindness of Women (1991)
Rushing to Paradise (1994)
Cocaine Nights (1996)
Super-Cannes (2000)
Millennium People (2003)
Kingdom Come (2006)
"Mobile" (1957)
"The Concentration City" (1957)
"Track 12" (1958)
"Zone of Terror" (1960)
"The Sound-Sweep" (1960)
"The Voices of Time" (1960)
"Chronopolis" (1960)
"Studio 5, The Stars" (1961)
"Deep End" (1961)
"Mr F. is Mr F." (1961)
"Billennium" (1962)
"Minus One" (1963)
"The Recognition" (1967)
" The Day of Forever" (1967)
"Why I Want to Fuck Ronald Reagan" (1968)
"Venus Smiles" (1971)
The Voices of Time and Other Stories (1962)
Billennium (1962)
Passport to Eternity (1963)
The 4-Dimensional Nightmare (1963)
The Terminal Beach (1964)
The Impossible Man (1966)
The Overloaded Man (1967)
The Disaster Area (1967)
The Day of Forever (1967)
Vermilion Sands (1971)
Chronopolis and Other Stories (1971)
Low-Flying Aircraft and Other Stories (1976)
The Best of J. G. Ballard (1977)
The Best Short Stories of J. G. Ballard (1978)
The Venus Hunters (1980)
Myths of the Near Future (1982)
The Voices of Time (1985)
Memories of the Space Age (1988)
War Fever (1990)
The Complete Short Stories of J. G. Ballard: Volume 1 (2006)
The Complete Short Stories of J. G. Ballard: Volume 2 (2006)
A User's Guide to the Millennium (1996)
Extreme Metaphors (2012)
Miracles of Life (2008)
When Dinosaurs Ruled the Earth (1970)
Crash! (1971)
Empire of the Sun (1987)
Crash (1996)
The Atrocity Exhibition (1998)
Low-Flying Aircraft (2002)
High-Rise (2015)


URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Make_Room!_Make_Room!
Content:

Make Room! Make Room! is a 1966 science fiction novel written by Harry Harrison exploring the consequences of both unchecked population growth on society and the hoarding of resources by a wealthy minority.[1] It was originally serialized in Impulse magazine.
Set in 1999 from August until moments after New Year's Eve ends and the year 2000 begins, the novel explores trends in the proportion of world resources used by the United States and other countries compared to population growth, depicting a world where the global population is seven billion people, plagued with overcrowding, resource shortages and a crumbling infrastructure. The plot jumps from character to character, recounting the lives of people in various walks of life in New York City, population 35 million.
The novel was the basis of the 1973 science fiction film Soylent Green, although the film changed much of the plot and theme and introduced cannibalism as a solution to feeding people.[2]


## Plot summary
Make Room! Make Room! is set in an overpopulated New York City in 1999 (33 years after the time of first publication). Thirty-year-old Police Detective Andy Rusch lives in half a room, sharing it with Sol, a retired engineer who has adapted a bicycle to generate power for an old television set and a refrigerator.
When Andy lines up for their continually reducing water ration, he witnesses a public speech by the "Elders", older people forcibly retired from work. A riot breaks out after a nearby food shop has a surprise sale on "soylent" (soy and lentil) steaks. The shop is looted by the mob. Billy Chung, an 18-year-old Taiwanese-American, grabs a box of steaks. He eats some of them and sells the rest to raise enough money to land a job as a Western Union messenger boy. His first delivery takes him into a fortified apartment block, complete with the rare luxuries of air conditioning and running water for showers. He delivers his message to a rich racketeer named "Big Mike" O'Brien and sees Shirl, Mike's 23-year-old live-in mistress. Billy leaves the apartment but fixes it so he can get back into the building later. He breaks into Mike's place, but when Mike catches him in the act, Billy accidentally kills him and flees, empty-handed.
A piece of evidence may connect an out-of-town crime boss who may be trying to expand into New York City, a threat to Mike's associates. They see to it that Andy keeps working on the case, in addition to his regular duties.
During his investigation, Andy becomes enamored of Shirl. He ensures that she is permitted to stay in the apartment until the end of the month. During this month, they enjoy the luxuries. Afterwards, Shirl moves in with Andy. Shirl soon becomes disappointed with how little time the overworked Andy has for her. She eventually sleeps with a wealthy man she meets at a party.
To evade capture, Billy leaves the city, eventually breaking into the abandoned Brooklyn Navy Yard, where he comes to live with Peter, who is eagerly awaiting the new millennium as the end of the world. Soon they are attacked and displaced by a trio. They find a new home in a car. Months after the murder, Billy decides to visit his family, believing the police have lost interest in him.
Meanwhile, Sol decides he can no longer remain passive in the face of humanity's overpopulation crisis. He joins a march to protest the overturning of a legislative bill that supports population control. Sol is injured in a riot and catches pneumonia. A few days after his death, an obnoxious family takes over his living quarters, making Shirl and Andy's life much more miserable than before.
Andy stumbles upon Billy Chung, cornering him in his family's home. When Billy moves to attack Andy with a knife, he stumbles, and Andy accidentally shoots and kills him. The gangsters have lost interest by this point, but his superiors disavow Andy's actions, and he is temporarily demoted to ordinary patrolman. When he returns to his quarters, he finds Shirl has left him.
Andy is on patrol in Times Square on New Year's Eve, where he spots Shirl among rich party-goers. As the clock strikes midnight, Andy encounters Peter, who is distraught that the world has not ended and asks how life can continue as it is. The story concludes with the Times Square screen announcing that "Census says United States had biggest year ever, end-of-the-century, 344 million citizens."


## Concept and creation
Author Harry Harrison claimed, "The idea came from an Indian I met after the war, in 1946. He told me, 'Overpopulation is the big problem coming up in the world' (nobody had ever heard of it in those days) and he said, 'Want to make a lot of money, Harry? You have to import rubber contraceptives to India.' I didn't mind making money, but I didn't want to be the rubber king of India!"[3]


## Short story
Several years after writing the novel, Harrison created the short story "Roommates" (1971), largely by joining excerpts from the novel. Harrison describes the impetus and creation of the short story in his introduction for it in The Best of Harry Harrison. He recounts how he was asked for an excerpt for reprinting, but that he did not think any simple excerpt stood alone. So he took various scenes from the "roommates" plot strand and combined them into the short story.


## References
^ Netzley, Patricia (1999). Environmental Literature. California: ABC-CLIO. ISBN 1-57607-000-X.
^ Westfahl, Gary (2005), The Greenwood Encyclopedia of Science Fiction and Fantasy: Themes, Works and Wonders, Greenwood Publishing, p. 575, ISBN 978-0-313-32952-4
^ "Harry Harrison: When the World Was Young", Locus Magazine, March 2006


## External links
Make Room! Make Room! title listing at the Internet Speculative Fiction Database
Roommates title listing at the Internet Speculative Fiction Database
Make Room! Make Room!
v
t
e
Planet of the Damned (1962)
Bill, the Galactic Hero (1965)
Make Room! Make Room! (1966)
The Technicolor Time Machine (1967)
Captive Universe (1969)
The Daleth Effect (1970)
Tunnel Through the Deeps (1972)
Star Smashers of the Galaxy Rangers (1973)
A Rebel in Time (1983)
Deathworld trilogy (1960–1968)
The Stainless Steel Rat series (1961–2010)
To the Stars trilogy (1980–1981)
Eden trilogy: West of Eden (1984), Winter in Eden (1986), Return to Eden (1988)
Stars and Stripes trilogy (1998-2002)
The Hammer and the Cross (1993)
One King's Way (1994)
King and Emperor (1996)
War with the Robots (1962)
Two Tales and Eight Tomorrows (1965)
Prime Number (1970)
One Step from Earth (1970)
50 in 50 (2001)
Spaceship Medic (1970) (juvenile)
Vendetta for the Saint (1964)
"The Streets of Ashkelon" (1962)


URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Flowers_for_Algernon
Content:

Flowers for Algernon is a short story by American author Daniel Keyes, which he later expanded into a novel and adapted for film and other media. The short story, written in 1958 and first published in the April 1959 issue of The Magazine of Fantasy & Science Fiction, won the Hugo Award for Best Short Story in 1960.[2] The novel was published in 1966 and was joint winner of that year's Nebula Award for Best Novel (with Babel-17).[3]
Algernon is a laboratory mouse who has undergone surgery to increase his intelligence. The story is told by a series of progress reports written by Charlie Gordon, the first human subject for the surgery, and it touches on ethical and moral themes such as the treatment of the mentally disabled.[4]
Although the book[5] has often been challenged for removal from libraries in the United States and Canada, sometimes successfully, it is frequently taught in schools around the world and has been adapted many times for television, theater, radio and as the Academy Award-winning film Charly.[6][7][8][9]


## History


### Background
The ideas for Flowers for Algernon developed over 14 years and were inspired by events in Keyes's life, starting in 1945 with Keyes's conflict with his parents, who were pushing a pre-medical education despite his desire to pursue a writing career. Keyes felt that his education was driving a wedge between himself and his parents, and this led him to wonder what would happen if it were possible to increase a person's intelligence.[4][8][10] Based on these considerations, Keyes further developed his ideas for Flowers for Algernon by transforming the initial concept into what Keyes asserted as "a classic tragedy".[11] Keyes, in his 1999 memoir Algernon, Charlie and I: A Writer's Journey, explains more about his creative writing process and relates key insights for the conception of Flowers for Algernon. He said that he was inspired by Aristotle's dictum in the Poetics, which states that a tragedy can only occur for the highborn, because one could only have a tragic fall from a great height.[11] Keyes's thought was: "let's test that".[11] He therefore made his story's main character a person who was initially "lowborn" (a mentally disabled young man) who then became a "highborn" after the intelligence-enhancing procedures.[11] His goal was to elevate such a character to the heights of genius at the cost of being disconnected before having them lose it all.
A pivotal moment occurred in 1957 while Keyes was teaching English to students with disabilities, and one of them asked if it would be possible for the student to be put into an ordinary class (mainstreamed) if he worked hard and became smart.[4][12] Keyes also witnessed the dramatic change in another learning-disabled student who regressed after he was removed from regular lessons. Keyes said that "When he came back to school, he had lost it all. He could not read. He reverted to what he had been. It was a heart-breaker."[4]
Characters in the book were based on people in Keyes's life. The character of Algernon was inspired by a university dissection class, and the name was inspired by the poet Algernon Charles Swinburne.[13][better source needed] Nemur and Strauss, the scientists who develop the intelligence-enhancing surgery in the story, were based on professors Keyes met while in graduate school.[14] Events that Charlie experiences were also based on Keyes's life, including the Rorschach test and Charlie's frustration with it, which was inspired by Keyes' past experience with the test when he was exploring the causes of his anxiety as a college student. As he was developing his story, he satirically transformed his frustrating Tests and Measurements advisor into Burt, the tester who similarly frustrates Charlie.[11]
In 1958, Keyes was approached by Galaxy Science Fiction magazine to write a story, at which point the elements of Flowers for Algernon fell into place.[13][better source needed] When the story was submitted to Galaxy, however, editor Horace Gold suggested changing the ending so that Charlie retained his intelligence, married Alice Kinnian, and lived happily ever after.[15] Keyes refused to make the change and sold the story to The Magazine of Fantasy & Science Fiction instead.[13][better source needed]
Keyes worked on the expanded novel between 1962 and 1965[16] and first tried to sell it to Doubleday, but they also wanted to change the ending. Again, Keyes refused and gave Doubleday back their advance.[15] Five publishers rejected the story over the course of a year[15] until it was published by Harcourt in 1966.


### Publication
The short story "Flowers for Algernon" was first published as the lead story in the April 1959 issue of The Magazine of Fantasy & Science Fiction.[17][13][better source needed] It was later reprinted in The Best from Fantasy and Science Fiction, 9th series (1960),[18] the Fifth Annual of the Year's Best Science Fiction (1960),[19] Best Articles and Stories (1961),[13][better source needed] Literary Cavalcade (1961),[13][better source needed] The Science Fiction Hall of Fame, Volume One, 1929–1964 (1970),[20] and The Magazine of Fantasy & Science Fiction: A 30-Year Retrospective (1980).[18]
The Magazine of Fantasy & Science Fiction reprinted the original short story as part of its 30th anniversary October 1979 issue.[21] They reprinted it again in its May 2000 issue along with an essay titled "Algernon, Charlie and I: A Writer's Journey" by the author.[22] That magazine's cover announced the combination with "Flowers for Algernon / Daniel Keyes / the story and its origin".
The expanded novel was first published in 1966 by Harcourt Brace with the Bantam paperback following in 1968.[13][better source needed] As of 1997[update] the novel had not been out of print since its publication.[15] By 2004, it had been translated into 27 languages, published in 30 countries and sold more than 5 million copies.[23][better source needed] [24]


## Synopsis
The short story and the novel share many similar plot points, but the novel expands significantly on Charlie's developing emotional state as well as his intelligence, his memories of childhood, and the relationship with his family. Both are presented as a series of journal entries ("progress reports") written by the protagonist, Charlie Gordon. The style, grammar, spelling, and punctuation of these reports reflect changes in his mental and emotional growth.


### Short story
Charlie Gordon is a 37-year-old man with an IQ of 68 who works a menial job as a janitor at a factory.[a] At his job, his main "friends" are his co-workers Joe Carp and Frank Reilly, who frequently bully and mock him. Charlie attends a literacy program taught by Ms. Kinnian in hopes of improving his intelligence, and is selected to undergo an experimental surgical technique to increase it. The technique has already been tested on a number of nonhuman animals; the great success was with Algernon, a laboratory mouse. Although these events proved fruitful, the procedure's full results were unknown. Charlie's surgery is a success, and his IQ triples.
With an increased intelligence, he realizes his co-workers at the factory, whom he thought were his friends, only liked having him around so they could tease him. His new intelligence frightens his co-workers, and they start a petition to have him fired. Additionally, Charlie's perspective on his professors shifts negatively as he recognizes that Dr. Nemur is only using Charlie to advance his scientific career instead of altruistically helping Charlie become smarter. Later on, Charlie demonstrates courage by standing up for a 16-year-old imbecile dishwasher who gets mocked by customers at a local diner. As Charlie's intelligence peaks, Algernon's suddenly declines. The mouse loses his increased intelligence and mental age and dies afterward; Charlie buries him in the backyard of his home. Charlie realizes his intelligence increase is also temporary and that his fate will mirror Algernon's. As the effects of his mental deterioration are becoming more evident, he finds flaws in the experiment, which he calls the "Algernon–Gordon Effect". By the time he finishes his work, his intelligence has regressed to its original state. Charlie is aware of and pained by what is happening to him, as he loses his knowledge. He resumes his old job as a janitor at the factory and tries to go back to how things used to be, but he cannot stand the pity and guilt from those around him, including his co-workers, his landlady, and Ms. Kinnian. Charlie states he plans to "go away" from New York, and his last wish is for someone to put flowers on Algernon's grave.


### Novel
The novel opens with an epigraph taken from Book VII of Plato's The Republic:
Anyone who has common sense will remember that the bewilderments of the eye are of two kinds, and arise from two causes, either from coming out of the light or from going into the light, which is true of the mind's eye, quite as much as of the bodily eye.
Charlie Gordon, 32 years old, demonstrates an IQ of 68.[a] His uncle has arranged for him to hold a menial job at a bakery so that he will not have to live at the Warren State Home and Training School, a state institution. Desiring to improve himself, Charlie attends reading and writing classes, taught by Miss Alice Kinnian, at the Beekman College Center for Retarded Adults. Two researchers at Beekman, Professor Nemur and Dr. Strauss, are looking for a human test subject on whom to try a new surgical technique intended to increase intelligence. They have already performed the surgery on a mouse named Algernon, resulting in a dramatic improvement in his mental performance. Based on Alice's recommendation and his motivation to improve, Nemur and Strauss choose Charlie over smarter pupils to undergo the procedure.
The operation is successful, and Charlie's IQ reaches 185 within the next three months. At the same time, he begins recalling his childhood and remembers that his mother Rose physically abused him and wasted money on fake treatments for his disability, while his younger sister Norma resented him. As Charlie's intelligence, education, and understanding of the world increase, his relationships with people deteriorate. His co-workers at the bakery, who used to amuse themselves at his expense, now fear and resent his increased intelligence and persuade his boss to fire him. Alice enters a relationship with Charlie but breaks up with him after she realizes that she can no longer relate to him and claims that his intelligence has changed his personality. Later, Charlie loses trust in Strauss and particularly Nemur, believing that they considered him a laboratory subject and not a human before the operation. While at a scientific convention in Chicago, Charlie feels humiliated when he is treated like an experiment and flees with Algernon in retaliation.
After moving to Manhattan with Algernon, Charlie becomes involved in a relationship with Fay Lillman, his neighbor, which quells his loneliness. After an incident with a disabled busboy, Charlie becomes inspired to continue to improve Nemur and Strauss's experiment and applies for a grant. However, he notices Algernon is beginning to behave erratically. In his research, he discovers a flaw behind Nemur and Strauss's procedure that indicates he might lose his intelligence and possibly regress back to his previous state. Before that happens, Charlie publishes his findings as the "Algernon–Gordon effect", as Algernon dies.
As Charlie begins to regress to his former mental state, he finds closure with his family. Rose, who still lives in the family's old home in Brooklyn, has developed dementia and recognizes him only briefly; his father Matt, who broke off contact with the family years earlier, does not recognize him at all. He is only able to reconnect with Norma, who is now caring for Rose in their newly depressed neighborhood, but he declines to stay with them. Charlie begins dating Alice again, but his frustration with declining intelligence eventually causes him to end his relationships with her and Dr. Strauss. Unable to bear the thought of being dependent and pitied by his friends and co-workers, he decides to live at the Warren State Home and Training School, where no one knows about the operation. In a final postscript to his writings, he requests that someone put flowers on Algernon's grave in the backyard of Charlie's former residence.


## Style
Both the novel and the short story are written in an epistolary style collecting together Charlie's personal "progress reports" from a few days before the operation until he regresses back to his original state almost five months later. Initially, the reports are filled with elementary spelling errors and awkwardly constructed sentences, reflecting the writing of a young child.[25] The story is told from Charlie's point of view, in a first-person perspective, allowing the reader to see through Charlie's eyes and hear each thought. Keyes shares the importance of this in his memoir, "This had to be told from Charlie's perspective. It had to be first person, major character angle—in Charlie's mind and through Charlie's eyes all the way."[11] As an imbecile, Charlie is initially an unreliable narrator who presents the story through an immature worldview; his low intelligence compromises his ability to understand the world around him. This results in a case of dramatic irony, as readers are often more aware of Charlie's situation than he is.
Following the operation, however, the reports begin to show marked improvements in spelling, grammar, punctuation, and diction, indicating a rise in his intelligence.[26] As his intelligence improves, Charlie's perception broadens, and he realizes that things are entirely different than he had perceived them to be. Charlie's awareness increases to match that of the reader's and quickly surpasses it. This transforms him into a reliable narrator, able to provide all relevant information accurately.
Charlie's regression is conveyed by the loss of these skills.[26] In his final state, Charlie returns to a state of unreliability, his ability to accurately narrate events diminished by the regression. The polar differences in writing style emphasise the changes Charlie experiences from the operation and take the reader along with Charlie's arc and growth/regression as well as support the foil throughout the story.


## Themes
Important themes in Flowers for Algernon include the treatment of the mentally disabled,[4][27] the impact on happiness of the conflict between intellect and emotion,[28][29] and how events in the past can influence a person later in life.[29] Algernon is an example of a story that incorporates the science-fiction theme of uplift.[30]


## Reception and legacy
Algis Budrys of Galaxy Science Fiction praised Flowers for Algernon's realistic depiction of people as "rounded characters". Stating in August 1966 that Keyes had published little fiction and whether he would publish more was unknown, he concluded "If this is a beginning, then what a beginning it is, and if it is the high point in a very short career, then what a career".[31] In February 1967 Budrys named the book the best novel of the year.[32]


### Awards
The original short story won the Hugo Award for Best Short Story in 1960.[2] The expanded novel was joint winner of the Nebula Award for Best Novel in 1966, tied with Babel-17 by Samuel R. Delany,[3] and was nominated for the Hugo Award for Best Novel in 1967, losing out to The Moon Is a Harsh Mistress by Robert A. Heinlein.[33]
In the late 1960s, the Science Fiction Writers of America (SFWA) decided to give Nebula Awards retroactively and voted for their favorite science fiction stories of the era ending December 31, 1964 (before the Nebula Award was conceived). The short story version of Flowers for Algernon was voted third out of 132 nominees and was published in The Science Fiction Hall of Fame, Volume One, 1929–1964 in 1970.[34] Keyes was elected the SFWA Author Emeritus in 2000 for making a significant contribution to science fiction and fantasy, primarily as a result of Flowers for Algernon.[35]


### Censorship
Flowers for Algernon is on the American Library Association's list of the 100 Most Frequently Challenged Books of 1990–1999 at number 43.[6] The reasons for the challenges vary, but usually center on those parts of the novel in which Charlie struggles to understand and express his sexual desires.[36][better source needed] Many of the challenges have proved unsuccessful, but the book has occasionally been removed from school libraries, including some in Pennsylvania and Texas.[37][better source needed]


### Influence
Flowers for Algernon has been the inspiration for works that include the album A Curious Feeling by Genesis keyboardist Tony Banks.[38] It also inspired the 2006 modern dance work Holeulone by Karine Pontiès, which won the Prix de la Critique de la Communauté française de Belgique for best dance piece.[39] A 2001 episode of the TV series The Simpsons titled "HOMR" has a plot similar to the novel.[40] The 2012 film, Bourne Legacy, features a mentally disabled soldier who is reliant on an experimental medications to raise and maintain his intelligence, with much of the action centering on how to secure a supply with a touching scene capturing his fear of slipping back to his former state.[41][42] A 2013 episode of the TV series It's Always Sunny in Philadelphia titled "Flowers for Charlie" is heavily based on the novel.[43]


## Adaptations
Flowers for Algernon has been adapted many times for different media including stage, screen, and radio. These adaptations, as well as other media which have referenced it, include:
A 1961 episode of the television drama The United States Steel Hour, "The Two Worlds of Charlie Gordon", starring Cliff Robertson and Mona Freeman.[44][45]
A 1968 film, Charly, also starring Cliff Robertson, for which he won the Academy Award for Best Actor.[44][46]
A 1969 stage play, Flowers for Algernon by David Rogers.[44][47]
A 1978 stage musical, Charlie and Algernon by David Rogers and Charles Strouse.[44][48][49]
A 1979 concept album, A Curious Feeling by Tony Banks, is a loose adaptation, originally planned as a more faithful one.[50]
A 1991 radio play, Flowers for Algernon, for BBC Radio 4 starring Tom Courtenay.[51]
A 2000 television film, Flowers for Algernon, starring Matthew Modine.[52]
A 2001 Spider-Man comic story, "Flowers for Rhino", by Peter Milligan and Duncan Fregredo.[53]
A 2001 episode of the television series The Simpsons , "HOMR".[54]
A 2002 Japanese drama, Algernon ni Hanataba o for Fuji Television, starring Yūsuke Santamaria.[55]
A 2006 episode of the television series, Frisky Dingo, "Flowers for Nearl".[56]
A 2013 episode of the television series It's Always Sunny in Philadelphia, "Flowers for Charlie".[57]
A 2013 episode of the television series The League, "Flowers for Taco".[58]
A 2015 Japanese drama, Algernon ni Hanataba o for Tokyo Broadcasting System, starring Yamashita Tomohisa and Chiaki Kuriyama.[59]
A 2020 episode of the television series Curb Your Enthusiasm, "Beep Panic".[60]
Further stage and radio adaptations have been produced in France (1982), Ireland (1983), Australia (1984), Poland (1985), Japan (1987, 1990), and Czechoslovakia (1988).[44]


## Notes
^ a b Charlie's age is 37 in the short story and 32 in the novel.


## References
^ Daniel Keyes (1966). Flowers for Algernon (1st ed.). New York: Harcourt, Brace & World. OCLC 232370.
^ a b 1960 Hugo Awards, TheHugoAwards.org, July 26, 2007, retrieved April 23, 2008
^ a b "Past Winners of SWFA Nebula Awards". Science Fiction and Fantasy Writers of America. Archived from the original on June 5, 2011. Retrieved April 23, 2008.
^ a b c d e Emily Langer (June 18, 2014). "Daniel Keyes, author of the classic book 'Flowers for Algernon,' dies at 86". The Washington Post.
^ Daniel Keyes (2004) [1966]. Flowers for Algernon. Orlando: Harcourt. ISBN 9780156030304. OCLC 0156030306.
^ a b The 100 Most Frequently Challenged Books of 1990–1999 -ALA.org
^ Kyle Munley (October 3, 2008). "Challenged and Banned: Flowers for Algernon". Suvudu. Archived from the original on July 30, 2016. Retrieved June 25, 2015.
^ a b "Frequently Asked Questions and Updates". Daniel Keyes. Retrieved April 24, 2008.
^ Birdsall, Peter (1978). Mind War: Book Censorship in English Canada. CANLIT. p. 37. ISBN 0-920566-01-4.
^ Keyes 1999, p. 16
^ a b c d e f Keyes, Daniel (September 1, 2004). Algernon, Charlie, And I: A Writer's Journey. HarperCollins. ISBN 978-0-547-56408-1.
^ Keyes 1999, p. 97
^ a b c d e f g Hill 2004, p. 3
^ Arthur Evans (December 1, 2009). "The Inspiration for Charlie Gordon". Retrieved February 13, 2023.
^ a b c d "Daniel Keyes: 40 Years of Algernon". Locus Magazine. June 1997. Retrieved April 23, 2008.
^ Bujalski 2002, p. 52
^ "Publication: The Magazine of Fantasy and Science Fiction, April 1959". www.isfdb.org. Retrieved April 9, 2023.
^ a b "Fantasy & Science Fiction: Anthology Stories (by author)". sfsite.com. Retrieved April 30, 2008.
^ "The Fifth Annual of the Year's Best SF. Judith Merril. Simon & Schuster 1960". bestsf.net. Archived from the original on March 16, 2008. Retrieved April 30, 2008.
^ Silverberg 1970
^ "Publication: The Magazine of Fantasy & Science Fiction, October 1979". www.isfdb.org. Retrieved June 21, 2025.
^ "Publication: The Magazine of Fantasy & Science Fiction, May 2000". www.isfdb.org. Retrieved February 4, 2023.
^ Hill 2004, p. 9
^ Shaw, Tristan (September 7, 2019). "Meet American writer Daniel Keyes". Wayne State University. Retrieved May 3, 2023.
^ Bujalski 2002, p. 21
^ a b Bujalski 2002, p. 15
^ Bujalski 2002, p. 13
^ Coules 1991, p. ix
^ a b Bujalski 2002, p. 14
^ Langford, David (November 22, 2017). "Uplift". In Clute, John; Langford, David; Nicholls, Peter; Sleight, Graham (eds.). The Encyclopedia of Science Fiction. Gollancz. For both the experimental mouse and the retarded narrator in Flowers for Algernon ... , the arc of uplifted intelligence rises high above the species norm into similarly lonely realms, only to fall again.
^ Budrys, Algis (August 1966). "Galaxy Bookshelf". Galaxy Science Fiction. pp. 186–194.
^ Budrys, Algis (February 1967). "Galaxy Bookshelf". Galaxy Science Fiction. pp. 188–194.
^ "1967 Hugo Awards". TheHugoAwards.org. July 26, 2007. Retrieved April 30, 2008.
^ Silverberg 1970, p. xii
^ "Daniel Keyes to be Author Emeritus". Science Fiction and Fantasy Writers of America. Archived from the original on October 9, 2000. Retrieved April 21, 2008.
^ Hill 2004, pp. 7–9
^ Jodi Mathews (June 22, 1999). "Controversial book removed from Texas middle school after one parent complains". firstamendmentcenter.org. Archived from the original on September 28, 2016. Retrieved May 16, 2008.
^ Tony Banks Biography, tonybanks-online.com
^ "Agenda / Holeulone". La Terrasse. Archived from the original on July 21, 2011. Retrieved November 26, 2010.
^ Beck, Marilyn; Smith, Stacy Jenel. "A Talk with 'The Simpsons' Al Jean on the Show's 25th Anniversary". creators.com. Archived from the original on October 6, 2015. Retrieved October 5, 2015.
^ McWeeny, Drew (August 10, 2012). "Watch: Tony Gilroy discusses his 'Flowers For Algernon' take on 'Bourne'". UPROXX. Retrieved July 5, 2025.
^ Edelstein, David (August 10, 2012). "The Bourne Legacy: Behavior Modification, for Secret Agents and Moviegoers Alike". Vulture. Retrieved July 5, 2025.
^ "It's Always Sunny in Philadelphia: "Flowers For Charlie" (Episode 9.08)". Paste Magazine. July 26, 2022. Retrieved March 30, 2025.
^ a b c d e "Flowers for Algernon". Daniel Keyes. Retrieved April 22, 2008.
^ The Two Worlds of Charlie Gordon at IMDb
^ Charly at IMDb
^ "Flowers for Algernon by David Rogers". Dramatic Publishing. Archived from the original on October 23, 2007. Retrieved April 23, 2008.
^ "Charlie and Algernon: book and lyrics by David Rogers, music by Charles Strouse". Dramatic Publishing. Archived from the original on August 28, 2008. Retrieved April 23, 2008.
^ "Charlie and Algernon". Musical Notes. Retrieved April 24, 2008.
^ "Genesis News Com [it]: Tony Banks - A Curious Interview - 30th September 2009". www.genesis-news.com. May 13, 2010. Retrieved August 20, 2019.
^ Coules 1991, p. xxiv.
^ Shales, Tom (February 20, 2000). "'Algernon': Of Mouse And Man". The Washington Post. Retrieved July 1, 2018.
^ Lander, Randy. "SPIDER-MAN'S TANGLED WEB #6". thefourthrailcom. Archived from the original on May 25, 2002. Retrieved March 20, 2008.
^ Beck, Marilyn; Smith, Stacy Jenel (2013). "A Talk with 'The Simpsons' Al Jean on the Show's 25th Anniversary". Creators Syndicate. Archived from the original on October 6, 2015. Retrieved October 5, 2015.
^ Clements, Jonathan; Tamamuro, Motoko (November 1, 2003). The Dorama Encyclopedia: A Guide to Japanese TV Drama Since 1953. Stone Bridge Press. p. 81. ISBN 978-1-61172-521-6. Retrieved May 28, 2025.
^ "Embracing the Chaos of Adult Swim and Frisky Dingo". Aesthetics for Birds. May 9, 2024. Retrieved May 28, 2025.
^ Lang, Derrick J. (July 22, 2013). "'It's Always Sunny In Philadelphia' Season 9 Spoilers Revealed At Comic-Con". The Huffington Post. Retrieved December 28, 2014.
^ "The League: "Flowers For Taco"". AV Club. October 24, 2013. Retrieved May 28, 2025.
^ "[JDrama] Algernon ni Hanataba wo Ep02 720p HDTV x264 AAC-DoA :: Nyaa". Nyaa. April 20, 2015. Retrieved May 28, 2025.
^ Bramesco, Charles (March 1, 2024). "The Most Essential Richard Lewis Episodes of Curb Your Enthusiasm". Vulture. Retrieved May 28, 2025.
Literature portal


## Sources
Bujalski, Andrew (2002). Aglietti, Boomie; Quinio, Dennis (eds.). Flowers for Algernon: Daniel Keyes. Spark. ISBN 1-58663-514-X.
Coules, Bert (1991). The Play of Daniel Keyes' Flowers for Algernon (including notes by Robert Chambers). Heinemann (published 1993). ISBN 0-435-23293-2.
Hill, Cheryl (2004). "A History of Daniel Keyes' Flowers for Algernon" (PDF). LIBR 548F: History of the Book. Archived from the original (PDF) on February 21, 2007.
Keyes, Daniel (1999). Algernon, Charlie and I: A Writer's Journey. Boca Raton, FL: Challcrest Press Books. ISBN 1-929519-00-1.
Scholes, Robert (1975). Structural Fabulation: An Essay on Fiction of the Future. Notre Dame, IN: University of Notre Dame Press. ISBN 0-268-00570-2.
Silverberg, Robert, ed. (1970). The Science Fiction Hall of Fame, Volume One, 1929–1964. Tom Doherty Associates. ISBN 0-7653-0537-2.
"Flowers For Algernon". The Encyclopedia of Science Fiction.


## External links
"Flowers for Algernon" title listing at the Internet Speculative Fiction Database
Flowers for Algernon title listing at the Internet Speculative Fiction Database
"Flowers for Algernon" on the Internet Archive
v
t
e
Flowers for Algernon
The Minds of Billy Milligan
Charly (1968 film)
Charlie and Algernon (1978 musical)
Flowers for Algernon (2000 film)
The Crowded Room (2023 Tv Series)
v
t
e
"Allamagoosa" by Eric Frank Russell (1955)
"The Star" by Arthur C. Clarke (1956)
"Or All the Seas with Oysters" by Avram Davidson (1958)
"That Hell-Bound Train" by Robert Bloch (1959)
"Flowers for Algernon" by Daniel Keyes (1960)
Complete list
Retro
1955–1960
1961–1980
1981–2000
2001–2020
2021–present
v
t
e
Dune by Frank Herbert (1966)
Babel-17 by Samuel R. Delany / Flowers for Algernon by Daniel Keyes (1967)
The Einstein Intersection by Samuel R. Delany (1968)
Rite of Passage by Alexei Panshin (1969)
The Left Hand of Darkness by Ursula K. Le Guin (1970)
Ringworld by Larry Niven (1971)
A Time of Changes by Robert Silverberg (1972)
The Gods Themselves by Isaac Asimov (1973)
Rendezvous with Rama by Arthur C. Clarke (1974)
The Dispossessed by Ursula K. Le Guin (1975)
The Forever War by Joe Haldeman (1976)
Man Plus by Frederik Pohl (1977)
Gateway by Frederik Pohl (1978)
Dreamsnake by Vonda N. McIntyre (1979)
The Fountains of Paradise by Arthur C. Clarke (1980)
Timescape by Gregory Benford (1981)
The Claw of the Conciliator by Gene Wolfe (1982)
No Enemy But Time by Michael Bishop (1983)
Startide Rising by David Brin (1984)
Neuromancer by William Gibson (1985)
Ender's Game by Orson Scott Card (1986)
Speaker for the Dead by Orson Scott Card (1987)
The Falling Woman by Pat Murphy (1988)
Falling Free by Lois McMaster Bujold (1989)
The Healer's War by Elizabeth Ann Scarborough (1990)
Tehanu: The Last Book of Earthsea by Ursula K. Le Guin (1991)
Stations of the Tide by Michael Swanwick (1992)
Doomsday Book by Connie Willis (1993)
Red Mars by Kim Stanley Robinson (1994)
Moving Mars by Greg Bear (1995)
The Terminal Experiment by Robert J. Sawyer (1996)
Slow River by Nicola Griffith (1997)
The Moon and the Sun by Vonda N. McIntyre (1998)
Forever Peace by Joe Haldeman (1999)
Parable of the Talents by Octavia E. Butler (2000)
Darwin's Radio by Greg Bear (2001)
The Quantum Rose by Catherine Asaro (2002)
American Gods by Neil Gaiman (2003)
Speed of Dark by Elizabeth Moon (2004)
Paladin of Souls by Lois McMaster Bujold (2005)
Camouflage by Joe Haldeman (2006)
Seeker by Jack McDevitt (2007)
The Yiddish Policemen's Union by Michael Chabon (2008)
Powers by Ursula K. Le Guin (2009)
The Windup Girl by Paolo Bacigalupi (2010)
Blackout/All Clear by Connie Willis (2011)
Among Others by Jo Walton (2012)
2312 by Kim Stanley Robinson (2013)
Ancillary Justice by Ann Leckie (2014)
Annihilation by Jeff VanderMeer (2015)
Uprooted by Naomi Novik (2016)
All the Birds in the Sky by Charlie Jane Anders (2017)
The Stone Sky by N. K. Jemisin (2018)
The Calculating Stars by Mary Robinette Kowal (2019)
A Song for a New Day by Sarah Pinsker (2020)
Network Effect by Martha Wells (2021)
A Master of Djinn by P. Djèlí Clark (2022)
Babel, or the Necessity of Violence by R. F. Kuang (2023)
The Saint of Bright Doors by Vajra Chandrasekera (2024)
Someone You Can Build a Nest In by John Wiswell (2025)
France
BnF data


URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Dream_Master
Content:

The Dream Master (1966), based on the novella "He Who Shapes", is a science fiction novel by American writer Roger Zelazny. Zelazny's original title was The Ides of Octember.[1] It won the 1965 Nebula Award for Best Novella (which it shared with The Saliva Tree by Brian W. Aldiss in a tie).[2]


## Plot summary
In the future, overpopulation and technological advances have created a world where humanity suffocates psychologically beneath its own mass while abiding in relative physical comfort. This is a world ripe for psychotherapeutic innovations, such as the "neuroparticipant therapy" in which the protagonist, Charles Render, is considered foremost in the field.
Patients connect to a virtual reality-style simulation controlled directly by the analyst's mind; the analyst then works with the patient to construct dreams, nightmares which afford insight into the underlying neuroses of the patient, and in some cases the possibility of direct intervention. As an example, one man mentally immersed in a fantasy world sees it destroyed at Render's hands, and is thus cured of his obsession with it.
Render takes on a patient with an unusual problem. Eileen Shallot aspires to become a neuroparticipant therapist herself, but is hampered by congenital blindness. She would be unable to convincingly construct visual dreams for them; indeed, in a case of eye-envy, her own neurotic desire to see through the eyes of her patients might prevent her from treating them effectively. As she explains to Render, if a practicing neuroparticipant therapist is willing to work with her, he can expose her to the full range of visual stimuli in a controlled environment, free of her own attachments to the issue, and enable her to pursue her career.
Despite his better sense and the advice of colleagues, Render agrees to go along with the treatment. As they progress, Eileen's hunger for visual stimulation continues to grow, and she begins to assert her will against Render's, subsuming him into her own dreams.


## Other media
In 1981, Zelazny wrote a film outline based on The Dream Master, which was purchased by 20th Century Fox and later developed into the film Dreamscape. Because he wrote the outline but neither the treatment nor script, his name did not appear in the credits. Claims that he had his name removed from the credits are unfounded.[3]
The plot of The Dream Master inspired Gary Numan's song "I Am Render" (on Numan's 1983 album Warriors).


## See also
"Dreams Are Sacred", a short story by Peter Phillips.


## References
^ The Lesser Spotted Science Fiction Writer - Part 7: Roger Zelazny
^ Knight, Damon (1966). Nebula Award Stories. New York City, NY: Pocket Books. p. 65.
^ "...And Call Me Roger": The Literary Life of Roger Zelazny, Part 4, by Christopher S. Kovacs. In: The Collected Stories of Roger Zelazny, Volume 4: Last Exit to Babylon, NESFA Press, 2009.
v
t
e
The Saliva Tree by Brian W. Aldiss / He Who Shapes by Roger Zelazny (1966)
The Last Castle by Jack Vance (1967)
Behold the Man by Michael Moorcock (1968)
Dragonrider by Anne McCaffrey (1969)
A Boy and His Dog by Harlan Ellison (1970)
Ill Met in Lankhmar by Fritz Leiber (1971)
The Missing Man by Katherine Maclean (1972)
A Meeting with Medusa by Arthur C. Clarke (1973)
The Death of Doctor Island by Gene Wolfe (1974)
Born with the Dead by Robert Silverberg (1975)
Home Is the Hangman by Roger Zelazny (1976)
Houston, Houston, Do You Read? by James Tiptree Jr. (1977)
Stardance by Spider Robinson and Jeanne Robinson (1978)
The Persistence of Vision by John Varley (1979)
Enemy Mine by Barry B. Longyear (1980)
Unicorn Tapestry by Suzy McKee Charnas (1981)
The Saturn Game by Poul Anderson (1982)
Another Orphan by John Kessel (1983)
Hardfought by Greg Bear (1984)
Press Enter by John Varley (1985)
Sailing to Byzantium by Robert Silverberg (1986)
R&R by Lucius Shepard (1987)
The Blind Geometer by Kim Stanley Robinson (1988)
The Last of the Winnebagos by Connie Willis (1989)
The Mountains of Mourning by Lois McMaster Bujold (1990)
The Hemingway Hoax by Joe Haldeman (1991)
Beggars in Spain by Nancy Kress (1992)
City of Truth by James Morrow (1993)
The Night We Buried Road Dog by Jack Cady (1994)
Seven Views of Olduvai Gorge by Mike Resnick (1995)
Last Summer at Mars Hill by Elizabeth Hand (1996)
Da Vinci Rising by Jack Dann (1997)
Abandon in Place by Jerry Oltion (1998)
Reading the Bones by Sheila Finch (1999)
Story of Your Life by Ted Chiang (2000)
Goddesses by Linda Nagata (2001)
The Ultimate Earth by Jack Williamson (2002)
Bronte's Egg by Richard Chwedyk (2003)
Coraline by Neil Gaiman (2004)
The Green Leopard Plague by Walter Jon Williams (2005)
Magic for Beginners by Kelly Link (2006)
Burn by James Patrick Kelly (2007)
Fountain of Age by Nancy Kress (2008)
The Spacetime Pool by Catherine Asaro (2009)
The Women of Nell Gwynne's by Kage Baker (2010)
The Lady Who Plucked Red Flowers Beneath the Queen's Window by Rachel Swirsky (2011)
The Man Who Bridged the Mist by Kij Johnson (2012)
After the Fall, Before the Fall, During the Fall by Nancy Kress (2013)
The Weight of the Sunrise by Vylar Kaftan (2014)
Yesterday's Kin by Nancy Kress (2015)
Binti by Nnedi Okorafor (2016)
Every Heart a Doorway by Seanan McGuire (2017)
All Systems Red by Martha Wells (2018)
The Tea Master and the Detective by Aliette de Bodard (2019)
This Is How You Lose the Time War by Amal El-Mohtar and Max Gladstone (2020)
Ring Shout by P. Djèlí Clark (2021)
And What Can We Offer You Tonight by Premee Mohamed (2022)
Even Though I Knew the End by C. L. Polk (2023)
Linghun by Ai Jiang (2024)
The Dragonfly Gambit by A. D. Sui (2025)


URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Stand_on_Zanzibar
Content:

Stand on Zanzibar is a dystopian New Wave science fiction novel written by John Brunner and first in part published in NEW WORLDS in 1967 and in book form in 1968. The book won a Hugo Award for Best Novel at the 27th World Science Fiction Convention in 1969, as well as the 1969 BSFA Award and the 1973 Prix Tour-Apollo Award.


## Description
The novel is about overpopulation and its projected consequences.[1] The story is set in 2010, mostly in the United States. The narrative follows the lives of a large cast of characters, chosen to give a broad cross-section of the future world. Some of these interact directly with the central narrative, while others add depth to Brunner's world. Brunner appropriated this narrative technique from the U.S.A. trilogy, by John Dos Passos.[2][1][3]
The main story is about two New York men, Donald Hogan and Norman Niblock House, who share an apartment.[1] House is a rising executive at General Technics, one of the powerful corporations. Using his "Afram" (African American) heritage to advance his position, he has risen to vice-president at age twenty-six.
The two plots concern the fictional African state of Beninia making a deal with General Technics to take over the management of their country, to speed up development from Third World to First World status. A second plot is a breakthrough in genetic engineering in the fictional Southeast Asian nation of Yatakang (an island nation and a former Dutch colony, like Indonesia), to which Hogan is soon sent by the United States government to investigate. The two plots cross, bringing potential implications for the world.
The title Stand on Zanzibar is an allusion to a thought experiment in which it was calculated that all the human beings in the world could fit shoulder to shoulder on the Isle of Wight; given population growth, Brunner expanded this to the island of Zanzibar.


## Characters
Norman Niblock House, VP of HR at General Technics
Donald Hogan, "synthesist" and spy
Georgette Tallon Buckfast, "Old GT", founder of General Technics, 91 years old, but looking 60, her body containing many artificial parts.
Zadkiel F. Obomi, President of Beninia
Elihu Rodan Masters, US Ambassador to Beninia
Professor Doctor Sugaiguntung, university department head in Yatakang
Stallion "Stal" Lucas, a yonderboy
Olive Almeiro, baby farmer in Puerto Rico
Jeff Young, vendor of explosives and sabotage equipment
Henry Butcher
Chad C. Mulligan, former sociologist
Jogajong, revolutionary
Pierre Clodard, Jeannine Clodard, siblings, of pied-noir heritage
Eric Ellerman, plant geneticist
Poppy Shelton
Gerry Lindt, draftee
Guinevere Steele, née Dwiggins
Sheena Potter, Frank Potter
Victor Whatmough, Mary Whatmough, married
Sasha Peterson, Philip Peterson, mother and son
Pope Eglantine, Pope Thomas, rival popes
Grace Rowley, 77, early dementia
Arthur Golightly
Bennie Noakes, addict, watches TV
Mr and Mrs Everywhere, construct identities, like the Joneses


## Critical reception
Algis Budrys declared that Stand on Zanzibar "takes your breath away", saying that the novel "put[s] itself together seemingly without effort [and] paints a picture of the immediate future as it will, Brunner convinces you, certainly be".[4] James Blish said "I disliked everybody in it and I was constantly impeded by the suspicion that Brunner was not writing for himself but for a Prize. ...A man of Brunner's gifts should have seen ab initio that U.S.A. was a stillbirth even in its originator's hands".[5]
Thirty years after its publication, Greg Bear praised Stand on Zanzibar as a science fiction novel that, unusually, has not become dated. "It's not quite the future we imagined it to be, but it still reads as fresh as it did back in 1968, and that's an amazing accomplishment!"[6] In a retrospective review for The Guardian in 2010, Sam Jordison found the novel a "skilfully realised future dystopia", writing that it allowed Brunner "to express his most interesting ideas regarding corporate ethics, free will, the question of whether scientific progress is always good for humanity and the conflict between the individual and the state".[7] Ursula K. Heise declared that "Stand on Zanzibar, to some extent, sets the tone for literary texts from the 1980s and 1990s that re-engage the issue of population growth against the background of a multitude of interacting political, social, economic, ecological, and technological problems".[8]
In his 2021 book Doom: The Politics of Catastrophe, historian Niall Ferguson lauds Stand on Zanzibar for foreseeing the future better than more popular novels such as Fahrenheit 451, The Handmaid's Tale and Anthem.[9]
Yet, on further reflection, none of these authors truly foresaw all the peculiarities of our networked world, which has puzzlingly combined a rising speed and penetration of consumer information technology with a slackening of progress in other areas, such as nuclear energy, and a woeful degeneration of governance. The real prophets turn out, on closer inspection, to be less familiar figures—for example, John Brunner, whose Stand on Zanzibar (1968) is set in 2010, at a time when population pressure has led to widening social divisions and political extremism. Despite the threat of terrorism, U.S. corporations like General Technics are booming, thanks to a supercomputer named Shalmaneser. China is America's new rival. Europe has united. Brunner also foresees affirmative action, genetic engineering, Viagra, Detroit's collapse, satellite TV, in-flight video, gay marriage, laser printing, electric cars, the de-criminalization of marijuana, and the decline of tobacco. There is even a progressive president (albeit of Beninia, not America) named "Obomi".[10]
In a 2021 article regarding the prognostic ability of novelists, The Guardian pointed out that Stand on Zanzibar had also accurately predicted the fall of the Detroit auto industry.[11]
Jonathan Nolan was partially inspired by Stand on Zanzibar in developing the content for the third season of the television show Westworld.[12]


## See also
Behavioral sink
Konrad Lorenz
Make Room! Make Room!
The Jagged Orbit
The Sheep Look Up
The Shockwave Rider
The World Inside


## References
^ a b c Clute & Nicholls 1995, pp. 166–167.
^ "The Works that Most Influenced Science Fiction, 1963–1992". Retrieved 22 February 2009.
^ Pringle 1990, p. 295.
^ "Galaxy Bookshelf", Galaxy Science Fiction (May 1969), pp.138–40
^ "The Future in Books", Amazing Stories, September 1969, p. 122
^ "Greg Bear: Continuing the Dialog", Locus, February 2000, p. 78.
^ "Back to the Hugos: Stand on Zanzibar", The Guardian, 26 February 2010
^ Heise, Sense of Place and Sense of Planet, Oxford University Press, 2008
^ Ferguson, Niall (2021). "Conclusion". Doom: The Politics of Catastrophe. New York: Penguin Press. ISBN 9780241488447.
^ Ferguson, Niall (2021). Doom: The Politics of Catastrophe. New York: Penguin Press. pp. 392–393. ISBN 9780241488447.
^ Olterman, Philip (26 June 2021). "'At first I thought, this is crazy': the real-life plan to use novels to predict the next war". The Guardian. Retrieved 26 June 2021.
^ Renfro, Kim (13 April 2020). "Jonathan Nolan reveals the surprising sci-fi reference behind the mysterious 'Westworld' AI system 'Rehoboam'". Insider. Retrieved 14 April 2020.
Bibliography
Clute, John; Nicholls, Peter (1995). The Encyclopedia of Science Fiction. New York: St. Martin's Griffin. ISBN 0-312-13486-X.
Pringle, David (1990). The Ultimate Guide to Science Fiction. London: Grafton Books. ISBN 0-246-13635-9.


## External links
Ted Goia, "The Weird 1969 New Wave Sci-Fi Novel that Correctly Predicted the Current Day", 25 March 2013
Stephen H. Goldman, "John Brunner's Dystopias: Heroic Man in Unheroic Society", Science Fiction Studies 16, 1978
"From Technique to Critique: Knowledge and Human Interests in John Brunner’s Stand on Zanzibar, The Jagged Orbit, and The Sheep Look Up" (essay in Science Fiction Studies)
Hephzibah Anderson, The 1968 sci-fi that spookily predicted today, 10 May 2019, bbc.com
v
t
e
Echo in the Skull (1959)
The World Swappers (1959)
Slavers of Space (1960)
The Atlantic Abomination (1960)
Secret Agent of Terra (1962)
The Super Barbarians (1962)
Listen! The Stars! (1963)
The Astronauts Must Not Land (1963)
To Conquer Chaos (1964)
The Whole Man (1964)
The Martian Sphinx (1965)
The Long Result (1965)
The Squares of the City (1965)
The Productions of Time (1967)
Stand on Zanzibar Doubleday (1968), (1969)
Double, Double (1969)
The Jagged Orbit (1969)
The Sheep Look Up (1972)
Web of Everywhere (1974)
The Shockwave Rider (1975)
The Infinitive of Go (1980)
Players at the Game of People (1980)
The Crucible of Time (1983)
The Tides of Time (1984)
Children of the Thunder (1989)
A Maze of Stars (1991)
Muddle Earth (1993)
Times Without Number (1962)
Not Before Time (1968)
The Traveler in Black (1971)
Entry to Elsewhen (1972)
The Best of John Brunner (1988)
v
t
e
The Sword in the Stone by T. H. White (1939)
Slan by A. E. van Vogt (1941)
Beyond This Horizon by Anson MacDonald (1943)
Conjure Wife by Fritz Leiber (1944)
Shadow Over Mars by Leigh Brackett (1945)
The Mule by Isaac Asimov (1946)
Farmer in the Sky by Robert A. Heinlein (1951)
Fahrenheit 451 by Ray Bradbury (1954)
The Demolished Man by Alfred Bester (1953)
They'd Rather Be Right (aka: The Forever Machine) by Mark Clifton and Frank Riley (1955)
Double Star by Robert A. Heinlein (1956)
The Big Time by Fritz Leiber (1958)
A Case of Conscience by James Blish (1959)
Starship Troopers by Robert A. Heinlein (1960)
A Canticle for Leibowitz by Walter M. Miller, Jr. (1961)
Stranger in a Strange Land by Robert A. Heinlein (1962)
The Man in the High Castle by Philip K. Dick (1963)
Here Gather the Stars (aka: Way Station) by Clifford D. Simak (1964)
The Wanderer by Fritz Leiber (1965)
Dune by Frank Herbert / ...And Call Me Conrad (aka: This Immortal) by Roger Zelazny (1966)
The Moon Is a Harsh Mistress by Robert A. Heinlein (1967)
Lord of Light by Roger Zelazny (1968)
Stand on Zanzibar by John Brunner (1969)
The Left Hand of Darkness by Ursula K. Le Guin (1970)
Ringworld by Larry Niven (1971)
To Your Scattered Bodies Go by Philip José Farmer (1972)
The Gods Themselves by Isaac Asimov (1973)
Rendezvous with Rama by Arthur C. Clarke (1974)
The Dispossessed by Ursula K. Le Guin (1975)
The Forever War by Joe Haldeman (1976)
Where Late the Sweet Birds Sang by Kate Wilhelm (1977)
Gateway by Frederik Pohl (1978)
Dreamsnake by Vonda N. McIntyre (1979)
The Fountains of Paradise by Arthur C. Clarke (1980)
The Snow Queen by Joan D. Vinge (1981)
Downbelow Station by C. J. Cherryh (1982)
Foundation's Edge by Isaac Asimov (1983)
Startide Rising by David Brin (1984)
Neuromancer by William Gibson (1985)
Ender's Game by Orson Scott Card (1986)
Speaker for the Dead by Orson Scott Card (1987)
The Uplift War by David Brin (1988)
Cyteen by C. J. Cherryh (1989)
Hyperion by Dan Simmons (1990)
The Vor Game by Lois McMaster Bujold (1991)
Barrayar by Lois McMaster Bujold (1992)
A Fire Upon the Deep by Vernor Vinge / Doomsday Book by Connie Willis (1993)
Green Mars by Kim Stanley Robinson (1994)
Mirror Dance by Lois McMaster Bujold (1995)
The Diamond Age by Neal Stephenson (1996)
Blue Mars by Kim Stanley Robinson (1997)
Forever Peace by Joe Haldeman (1998)
To Say Nothing of the Dog by Connie Willis (1999)
A Deepness in the Sky by Vernor Vinge (2000)
Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire by J. K. Rowling (2001)
American Gods by Neil Gaiman (2002)
Hominids by Robert J. Sawyer (2003)
Paladin of Souls by Lois McMaster Bujold (2004)
Jonathan Strange & Mr Norrell by Susanna Clarke (2005)
Spin by Robert Charles Wilson (2006)
Rainbows End by Vernor Vinge (2007)
The Yiddish Policemen's Union by Michael Chabon (2008)
The Graveyard Book by Neil Gaiman (2009)
The Windup Girl by Paolo Bacigalupi / The City & the City by China Miéville (2010)
Blackout/All Clear by Connie Willis (2011)
Among Others by Jo Walton (2012)
Redshirts by John Scalzi (2013)
Ancillary Justice by Ann Leckie (2014)
The Three-Body Problem by Cixin Liu, translated by Ken Liu (2015)
The Fifth Season by N. K. Jemisin (2016)
The Obelisk Gate by N. K. Jemisin (2017)
The Stone Sky by N. K. Jemisin (2018)
The Calculating Stars by Mary Robinette Kowal (2019)
A Memory Called Empire by Arkady Martine (2020)
Network Effect by Martha Wells (2021)
A Desolation Called Peace by Arkady Martine (2022)
Nettle & Bone by T. Kingfisher (2023)
Some Desperate Glory by Emily Tesh (2024)
v
t
e
Stand on Zanzibar by John Brunner (1969)
The Jagged Orbit by John Brunner (1970)
Rendezvous with Rama by Arthur C. Clarke (1973)
Inverted World by Christopher Priest (1974)
Orbitsville by Bob Shaw (1975)
Brontomek! by Michael G. Coney (1976)
The Jonah Kit by Ian Watson (1977)
A Scanner Darkly by Philip K. Dick (1978)
The Unlimited Dream Company by J. G. Ballard (1979)
Timescape by Gregory Benford (1980)
The Shadow of the Torturer by Gene Wolfe (1981)
Helliconia Spring by Brian W. Aldiss (1982)
Tik-Tok by John Sladek (1983)
Mythago Wood by Robert Holdstock (1984)
Helliconia Winter by Brian W. Aldiss (1985)
The Ragged Astronauts by Bob Shaw (1986)
Gráinne by Keith Roberts (1987)
Lavondyss by Robert Holdstock (1988)
Pyramids by Terry Pratchett (1989)
Take Back Plenty by Colin Greenland (1990)
The Fall of Hyperion by Dan Simmons (1991)
Red Mars by Kim Stanley Robinson (1992)
Aztec Century by Christopher Evans (1993)
Feersum Endjinn by Iain M. Banks (1994)
The Time Ships by Stephen Baxter (1995)
Excession by Iain M. Banks (1996)
The Sparrow by Mary Doria Russell (1997)
The Extremes by Christopher Priest (1998)
The Sky Road by Ken MacLeod (1999)
Ash: A Secret History by Mary Gentle (2000)
Chasm City by Alastair Reynolds (2001)
The Separation by Christopher Priest (2002)
Felaheen by Jon Courtenay Grimwood (2003)
River of Gods by Ian McDonald (2004)
Air by Geoff Ryman (2005)
End of the World Blues by Jon Courtenay Grimwood (2006)
Brasyl by Ian McDonald (2007)
The Night Sessions by Ken MacLeod (2008)
The City & the City by China Miéville (2009)
The Dervish House by Ian McDonald (2010)
The Islanders by Christopher Priest (2011)
Jack Glass by Adam Roberts (2012)
Ancillary Justice by Ann Leckie and Ack-Ack Macaque by Gareth L. Powell (tie) (2013)
Ancillary Sword by Ann Leckie (2014)
The House of Shattered Wings by Aliette de Bodard (2015)
Europe in Winter by Dave Hutchinson (2016)
The Rift by Nina Allan (2017)
Embers of War by Gareth L. Powell (2018)
Children of Ruin by Adrian Tchaikovsky (2019)
The City We Became by N. K. Jemisin (2020)
Shards of Earth by Adrian Tchaikovsky (2021)
City of Last Chances by Adrian Tchaikovsky (2022)
The Green Man’s Quarry by Juliet E. McKenna (2023)
Three Eight One by Aliya Whiteley (2024)


URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nova_(novel)
Content:

Nоva is a science fiction novel by American writer Samuel R. Delany published in 1968. The plot concerns the spaceship captain Lorq Von Ray's search for a nova, which will produce the essential power source Illyrion, and his vendetta with the Red family, who seek to kill him. Nominally space opera, it explores the politics and culture of a future where cyborg technology is universal, yet making major decisions can involve using tarot cards. It has strong mythological overtones, relating to both the Grail Quest and Jason's quest for the Golden Fleece.
Nova was nominated for the Hugo Award for Best Novel in 1969.[1] In 1984, David Pringle listed it as one of the 100 best science-fiction novels written since 1949.
After Delany completed Nova at the age of 25, his published output stopped for several years, although his writing continued. His next published novel was the pornographic Equinox in 1973.


## Synopsis
The novel is set in 3172, when most humans belong to one of two factions: Earth-based Draco and the Pleiades Federation. The most important family in Pleiades is the Von Rays, and the most important in Draco is the Reds, who own Red-shift Limited, a company making interstellar drives. Starship travel depends on Illyrion, a rare and valuable power source.
The story begins on Triton. A blind man named Dan tells a young drifter called the Mouse how he flew on Lorq Von Ray's starship, the Roc, and how he was injured in a dangerous voyage. A flashback to the Mouse's childhood follows, explaining how he stole a sensory syrynx (a machine capable of producing sound, images, and scents) and learned to play it from his friend Leo.
Lorq recruits the Mouse and other passers-by for a journey on the Roc. One is Katin, an intellectual who aspires to write a novel. Others are the brothers Lynceos and Idas, whose third brother is an indentured Illyrion miner; Sebastian, owner of flying pets; and his companion Tyÿ, a tarot reader. Lorq plans to fly through a nova to acquire seven tons of Illyrion. As the crew members leave Triton, Dan falls into a burning canyon and dies.
The third chapter is a flashback to Lorq's youth, beginning with his boyhood on the planet Ark, when he meets Prince Red and his sister Ruby. Prince was born without an arm and has an artificial one. As they play, Lorq mentions Prince's arm, angering him. Later, they sneak out to an arena and see Lorq's parents and the Reds' father watching animals fight.
Lorq becomes a starship racing pilot; his crew comprises Brian and Dan. He meets Prince again at a party, where Brian mentions Prince's arm. Lorq asks Ruby to run away with him, but Prince finds them and punches Lorq, scarring his face. Lorq's father describes how his great-grandfather secured the Pleiades Federation's independence by piracy and attacking Red-shift's mines, leading to a feud between the families. He also explains that the lower price of Illyrion from the Outer Colonies will shift the balance of power in the galaxy, bringing about the downfall of the Red family and ending Draco and Earth's dominance. Therefore, the two families are trying to destroy each other. Lorq wonders where to get Illyrion; later, Dan tells him how his ship accidentally fell into a nova but survived.
The main narrative resumes. Tyÿ gives Lorq a tarot reading about the mission; however, the Mouse has stolen a card. The Roc arrives at the planet Vorbis, and Lorq visits his aunt Cyana, who tells him a star likely to explode soon. Prince sends Lorq a message bragging that he destroyed Brian's life because he mentioned his arm, and that he intends to kill Lorq. Meanwhile, the Mouse visits some hunters and reunites with Leo. Ruby attacks Lorq, but one of Sebastian's pets saves him and the Roc returns to Pleiades.
The crew try to relax, but Prince and Ruby arrive. They argue with Lorq; Prince states that Lorq's quest will ruin both Draco and the Outer Colonies. Lorq replies that he is fighting for change, and Prince for stasis. Prince then reveals why he hates Lorq: their visit to the arena on Ark showed him how vicious and cruel his father could be. Sebastian and Lorq attack Prince and Ruby; Lorq uses the sensory syrynx to overwhelm their senses, leaving them seriously injured near a river of lava.
The Roc travels to the star, but Prince and Ruby reappear. Lorq boards their ship, and the star begins to erupt. Lorq seizes control and flies toward the star, killing Prince; Ruby dies too and Lorq flies through the nova, collecting the Illyrion but injuring his brain.
At the end of the novel, Katin and the Mouse leave the Roc and Katin declares that his novel should be about the Roc's last voyage. Echoing Katin's observation that stories about the quest for the Holy Grail are never finished, the last sentence of the novel is incomplete.


## Characters
Lorq Von Ray. Lorq is the scion of the wealthy Von Ray family, the most powerful clan in the Pleiades Federation. Originally a carefree playboy, Lorq is drawn into his family's feud with the Reds and, as a result, becomes obsessed with finding Illyrion. When Prince Red attacks him as a teenager at a fabulously opulent party in Isle St.-Louis in Paris, he scars Lorq's face badly; but Lorq refuses to remove the scarring for the rest of the novel and as a result carries an air of menace.As the book unfolds, Lorq learns that his family was founded by pirates, who killed members of the Red family in previous generations in order to keep the Pleiades free of Earth-based corporations, although Lorq's ancestors did so with the support of the Pleiades' citizens. The Reds, however, still carry a grudge.Although Lorq Von Ray is described as looking between forty-five and fifty years old, according to the dates in the book he is barely thirty. The explanation for this discrepancy between Lorq's actual age and older appearance is provided in the Mouse's speculation that Lorq is "aged, not old". He has a Norwegian father and a Senegalese mother from Earth.
The Mouse. This is the nickname for Pontichos Provechi, a young Gypsy from Earth, who, by age 18, has led an extremely varied life, and is just beginning to work in a starship navigation crew. He also entertains people by creating illusions and music with his sensory syrynx, a sound, scent, and hologram projector.
Katin Crawford. Katin is an intellectual from Earth's moon, who received a liberal arts education at Harvard University and who has worked till now at a series of unfulfilling clerical positions. Katin is a loner. His passion is to explore various moons across the Solar System. He also aspires to write a novel, for which he constantly records notes, although the form is obsolete by the time Nova takes place. Sometimes Katin annoys his colleagues by going off on long lectures on any number of topics; in this capacity, he is sometimes comic, even while acting as the novel's expository voice.
Sebastian and Tyÿ. This wandering, working couple consists of Sebastian, a powerful-looking man who is nonetheless gentle—he keeps a number of unusual pets with him, his "flapping black gillies"—and his companion, Tyÿ, a quiet mysterious woman and tarot-card reader. Like many of Delany's characters, Sebastian is racially mixed: although he has Asian features, his hair is naturally blond. Both are from the Pleiades and consider it an honor to work for the Von Ray family.
Lynceos and Idas. These brothers—two members of a set of triplets—are of African descent, but Lynceos is an albino. Hailing from the Outer Colonies, all three brothers had a tendency to use drugs and make mischief. As a result of one of their pranks, they ended in a type of indentured servitude and were forced to work in the colonies' Illyrion mines. (Such arrangements are common at that time to "recruit" workers for the mines.) The two talk in tandem. Jokingly Katin calls them a pair of "glorified salt and pepper shakers." Characters like the Mouse, Lynceos, Idas, Tyÿ, Sebastian, and even Katin can be seen as hippies, with itinerant lifestyles and drugs.
Prince Red. The scion of the Earth-based Red family, Prince was born with only one arm. In place of the other, he wears an artificial limb, which has unnatural strength. Its grip can compress sand into quartz crystals, which he can throw with the force of bullets. A troublemaker from birth (in his youth, he was forced constantly to shift schools because of discipline problems), he detests Lorq for numerous reasons, some of which he is not consciously aware of.Because of the power his artificial arm gives him, Prince can become extremely violent if anyone so much as mentions his deformity. As a little boy he sprains Lorq's mother's wrist when, innocently, she asks for his hand to take him home when he has gotten into mischief after dark with the other children.
Ruby Red. Prince's younger sister, Ruby, is a quiet-spoken woman, who appears to be completely under Prince's control. As an adolescent, Lorq falls in love with her, but she rebuffs him because of their families' hostile histories.Prince appears to have an unhealthy attachment to his sister—which, often, she seems to reciprocate. While their father, Aaron, is still alive at the time of the novel and in charge of the Red's vast industrial holdings, Prince and Ruby are the most visible members of the Red clan.
Dan. An Australian drifter and former member of Lorq's crew, Dan is the first to suggest to Lorq how a nova might be a source for Illyrion. Unfortunately, by the beginning of the novel, an accident on the first mission has damaged his senses and probably his sanity. He kills himself soon into the book, and most of his appearances take place in flashbacks.


## Setting
Nova is set in a science fictional universe with high technology, including interstellar travel and large-scale use of cyborg adaptions. Most people use intravenous drips for nutrition rather than eating,[2]: 200 and disease is considered to be impossible.[2]: 136 The novel is an obsolete art form and has been replaced by the "psychorama".[2]: 27, 156–7
However, in contrast to the technological background, reading the tarot is considered both scientific and accurate. Indeed, the Mouse is ridiculed as old-fashioned for his skepticism about it. In chapter four, Tyÿ gives Lorq the most detailed tarot reading in the novel.[2]: 112–121 As a child, he also had a tarot reading mentioning a death in his family, about a month before his uncle, Secretary Morgan, was assassinated.[2]: 114 Later, Cyana makes Lorq draw a card before she gives him the nova's location.[2]: 160
Politically, the galaxy is divided between three factions: Draco, based on Earth, and the earliest area to be colonized; the younger Pleiades Federation; and the even newer Outer Colonies, where Illyrion is mined rather than manufactured. In chapter three, Lorq's father explains these regions in terms of social class. Draco is primarily controlled by corporations and governments based on Earth. Pleiades was settled later by "small businesses... cooperative groups; even private citizens...a comparatively middle class movement". Lorq's great-great-grandfather attacked ships from Draco, including those owned by Red-shift, attempting to expand into Pleiades, helping assure its independence. A few generations before the novel begins, planets much further from the Galactic Center were discovered to possess Illyrion, and corporations in Draco and Pleiades subsidized people "from the lowest population strata" to move there.[2]: 89–94
Economic tensions have created a feud between the "new money" Von Ray family and the "old money" Red family, both of whom have a large stake in intergalactic transportation. Shortly before the novel's events (within the lifetime of Lorq's father), the Pleiades region achieved political autonomy from Draco, and is now an independent federation. At the time of the novel, citizens of the Outer Colonies are beginning to support the idea of independence as well.


### Technology and science
Illyrion is a fictional superheavy element with an atomic weight above 300, explained as being part of the hypothetical island of stability. It is a powerful energy source; a few grams provide enough energy for a starship. Katin estimates that 8-9,000 kg has been mined.[2]: 29–30
Almost all the characters in the book are cyborgs, equipped with four sockets (in the small of the back, back of the neck, and both wrists) that allow the user to connect directly to a computer.[2]: 39 These can be used to control starships or less complicated machines; in the opening scene, one character uses it to control a "sweeper" to clean the floor.[2]: 6 People using these sockets are called "cyborg studs".
The sockets are based on the ideas of a 23rd century philosopher and psychologist, Ashton Clark, and are intended to counteract the alienation caused by the separation between work and life. When the plugs and sockets were invented, work was done directly by people, reducing mental illness and making war impossible.[2]: 217–219


### Future history
The 20th century is a pivotal period in Nova's future history. Cyana, a curator at the Alkane Museum, claims that almost a quarter of its galleries are devoted to the period. She justifies this by saying that the it encompasses the greatest change in humanity's fundamental situation: "At the beginning of that amazing century, mankind was many societies living on one world; at its end, it was basically what we are now: an informatively unified society that lived on several worlds."[2]: 156
Characters make frequent references to 20th century culture. At Prince's party in Paris, a group of entertainers performs a song by The Mamas & the Papas.[2]: 76 Katin makes an offhand remark indicating that Monopoly is still in existence,[2]: 120 and mentions Bertrand Russell and Susanne Langer as renaissance figures.[2]: 28
The novel refers repeatedly to a historic Vega Republic, which tried to secede from Draco in 2800. Katin states that they tried to create original art, and calls them a "last stand for cultural autonomy". However, the secession failed, and Vegan art and architecture has been absorbed by the wider culture in what he calls a "parlor game".[2]: 102


## Themes


### Intertextuality
Nova has a number of motifs in common with Delany's later works; for example, the Mouse, a damaged artist who wears one shoe as does the Kid in the later Dhalgren, is a "classic Delany protagonist" in the mold of Jean Genet and François Villon[3] and a precursor to the Kid in Dhalgren.[4] Other motifs include Katin, an intellectual and writer who attempts to record the events around him; the twins Lynceos and Idas, one black, the other albino; and Dan, a barefoot derelict, with a rope holding up his pants.
The novel has also been compared to sea stories, with Dan recalling the blind pirate Pew in Treasure Island[5] and Lorq Von Ray the captain of the Flying Dutchman,[6] and described as suggesting "Moby Dick at a strobe-light show".[7] The name of Lorq's previous ship, the Caliban, is an reference to the character Caliban in William Shakespeare's play The Tempest.[8]
Nova also refers to other space operas. A planet is named "Trantor", after Isaac Asimov's Foundation trilogy, and the name Ashton Clark alludes to the writer Clark Ashton Smith.[8] Ruby Red has a poisoned tooth, recalling Frank Herbert's Dune. Prince's ability to squeeze sand into glass and quartz fragments strongly parallels the power of many action heroes (most notably Superman), and the idea of aristocratic families feuding in space is found in numerous other space opera novels. The character of Katin is partially written to resemble the classic "bore" in science fiction literature—a character who constantly gives lectures and explanations to describe the universe of the book. In Nova, however, Katin is constantly ridiculed for filling this role and on occasion is used for comic relief.
However, although Nova is a full-blooded space opera, it is also a counter to the ideology of expansion into and colonization of space. It is a work of postcolonial science fiction that appropriates the genre's traditions and conventions to open up space to imagine an alternative.[8]


### Myth
Nova also makes heavy use of myth. An author's note at the beginning of the book thanks Helen Adam and Russell FitzGerald for their help with Grail and tarot research. Reviewers and academics have compared it to the story of Prometheus and the Holy Grail.[3] However, the correspondences are not directly one-to-one but far more tangled; the characters are not heroes and villains in disguise but used to give resonance to the text.[9][10] Jo Walton has suggested that the story is what has been prefigured by myth, or that the tale of Lorq Von Ray has had other tales attached to it.[6]
For instance, Lorq Von Ray has been compared to Prometheus.[5] Idas and Lynceos share names with two of the Argonauts, the brothers Idas and Lynceus of Messene. Katin notes the story's "archetypal patterns" at the close of the story.[2]: 241


### The tarot
Much of the story revolves around a tarot reading Tyÿ gives Lorq at the beginning of the second mission, in which she rather successfully predicts the stakes and outcome. For example, The Tower appears, indicating that a powerful family (presumably the Reds or Von Rays) will fall, and the large number of pentacles indicates wealth. Prince and Ruby are represented by the King of Swords and the Queen of Swords, respectively. An anomaly in the reading, however, occurs when Tyÿ drops The Sun—which Lorq considered to represent a nova—and the Mouse pockets it, thus making it impossible for Tyÿ's reading to include this card.
Smaller tarot readings dot the rest of the novel. As a young child, Lorq receives a reading indicating a death in his family: within a month, his Uncle Morgan is assassinated. Likewise, Lorq's Aunt Cyana (Morgan's widow) has Lorq choose a single tarot card for insight: it is The Hanged Man, reversed, indicating that Lorq will succeed in his quest, but at a very high price.
The tarot used in Nova is a modified Rider–Waite deck. Lorq is most closely concerned with tarot; he is unwilling or unable to begin his quest without Tyÿ's reading, suggesting that the cards can satisfy human needs that technology is unable to assuage.[11] However, the Mouse also benefits from its use, as it helps him remember his mother using them to help her people.[12] At the end of the novel, he asks Tyÿ for a reading.


### Art
The two artists in Nova represent different kinds of art: the Mouse's sensory syrynx playing is spontaneous and instinctive, and on the other hand Katin's novel is carefully considered but not begun. However, while talking to the Mouse, Katin equates writing his novel to playing the sensory syrynx. Both create sensory experiences which then summon up memories, thoughts, and emotions related to those sensations. A deeper similarity is illuminated by Katin's remark that novels were primarily about relationships, and the obsolescence of the form implies that people in Nova's milieu are generally solitary and lonely. However, art can make people consider these relationships, such as when the Mouse experiences Leo's playing and thinks of his parents, analyzing the difference in his relationships with them.[13]
Katin, the aspiring novelist, frequently records notes about what his novel should be like. The definition of the novel is one of Nova's themes; contemporary Delany works with aesthetic concerns include Empire Star's concentration on point of view and Dhalgren's emphasis on the relationship between creative writing and criticism. Judith Merril's review goes so far as to call Nova "an experimental approach to literary criticism".[14] By the end of the novel, it is clear that the novel Katin will write is Nova itself.[15]
Another image of the work of art in Nova is the distinction between Katin and Lorq Von Ray at the end of the novel, after they have both experienced the nova. Lorq looks into the heart of the nova and his senses are overloaded; however Katin, who looked at it after the Roc left the core, is inspired to create art by organizing his experiences through controlled aesthetic techniques.[15]


### Race
Delany has consistently created black characters to populate his science fiction, and race is both obvious and essential to Nova.[16] The main character, Lorq, is mixed-race; his father is of Norwegian descent, and his Earth-born mother is Senegalese. This prevented the novel from being serialised in Analog before publication. The Mouse is Romani (referred to in the text as a "gypsy"); his real name is Pontichos Provechi.
The residents of the Pleiades Federation (and the Outer Colonies) overall are an extremely mixed racial population. In addition to appearances, characters from the Pleiades sometimes have names that indicate a mixed racial heritage. For example, Lorq's friend Yorgos Satsumi[2]: 184 has a clearly Japanese last name, but a first name that is decidedly Greek.
This is in sharp contrast to the Earth-centered Draco society, and the Red family are consistently referred to as Caucasian.[8] Individuals from Earth also tend to have extremely "WASPish" names. For example, Brian's full name is Brian Anthony Sanders. Moreover, according to the Mouse, Earth still has problems with racism; he recalls seeing Gypsies lynched when he was younger.
The crew of the Roc are mixed in both 20th century terms—Lorq, Idas, and Lynceos are of African descent; Sebastian is a blond Asian (referred to in the text as "Oriental"); the Mouse is Romani—and in their own milieu, in terms of origin and economic class. Idas and Lynceos hail from the Outer Colonies, Katin and the Mouse from Draco, and Tyÿ, Sebastian, and Lorq from Pleiades.[17] Lorq, at the center of the novel, is attracted to Ruby, angering Prince and reigniting their feud, even if his blackness is secondary to his identity as a Von Ray. Although race is different in the world of Nova, it still matters. However, Lorq is able to struggle against the Reds as equals and in the end, the fate of the galaxy turns on the abilities of a black man.[16]


### Politics
The setting of Nova is vague, but is explicitly defined as an empire,[2]: 26 and it depends on Illyrion mining in the peripheral Outer Colonies. The name of the planet where Lynceos and Idas worked, Tubman, is a direct allusion to the American abolitionist Harriet Tubman. Colonial history is thus mapped onto the galactic setting. The Red family symbolize the continuation of colonialism and empire; but because of Lorq's victory, the mining colonies will be closed, and the workers freed.[8]


### Man and machine
Description of work before Ashton Clark and Souquet's plugs and sockets resembles the alienated, dehumanizing labor described in Karl Marx's Economic and Philosophic Manuscripts of 1844. However, work with the sockets links labor to life, allowing unalienated work. This resembles Michael Hardt and Antonio Negri's idea of "living labor", subverting the alienations of capitalism and providing an alternative to it, while affirming the worker rather than the product.[8]
Although Delany sees technology as both a constructive and destructive force, he also sees it as having limits; it is not the sole determiner of a culture or a personality. Cooperation, or community, is needed for Lorq's success, as the whole diverse crew must work together to succeed. And despite the humanizing effect of plug and socket labor, the freedom from alienation that it ensures has limits. Tarot and superstitions, such as the Mouse spitting in the river, are vital psychological supports. Meanwhile, plugs and sockets are unable to cure Prince's issues, and he remains a selfish, indulgent, and incestuous murderer pursuing his economic monopoly.[11]


## Style
Delany uses a careful prose style to present his work both sensually and metaphorically. He uses language to differentiate the characters; for instance, people from Pleiades speak with verbs at the ends of their sentences, and Lynceos and Idas begin and finish each other's sentences. The same is true for point of view; due to their different upbringings, Katin, the Mouse, and Lorq all have different perspectives on the assassination of the politician Morgan.[6] Also, each page in the book carries a header that gives the year and location of the scene (e.g., "Draco, Earth, Paris, 3162"). This is useful because of the flashbacks in the long journey around the galaxy.
The novel's prose style has been called "poetic", with every metaphor serving the larger design.[6] The sensory syrynx is an example of this. The name alludes to the Greek god Pan's pipes;[13] moreover, early in the novel, the Mouse refers to it as his "ax".[2]: 25 This is both a weapon and a slang term for a guitar, fitting both the functions it performs in the novel. Furthermore, it symbolizes writing and invokes the Cretan labrys, implying the labyrinth. This allusive style has been described as a way to overcome the linearity of prose and enrich the text by invoking the textus, or web of meanings, in which Delany considers any given text to reside.[15]
Another example of this is the word nova itself; literally, it denotes a supernova, but it is also the plural of novum, Latin for "new thing", a term that can be used to mean science fictional inventions. Lorq describes the nova is a place where all law, human and natural, breaks down, to which the Mouse replies that the voyage will be "real changey".[2]: 24 As the title indicates, this is the novel's central metaphor: the destructive implosion/explosion of an entire sun, which both destroys most of a solar system and creates new elements.


## Publishing history
While awaiting publication by Doubleday, Nova was submitted to Analog editor John W. Campbell for potential serialization. Campbell rejected the novel, saying in a telephone conversation with Delany's agent that, though he had enjoyed the book, he did not feel his magazine's readership "would be able to relate to a black main character."[18]
Because there was no magazine serialization, however, in its first six months the novel did not get the initially wide exposure to readers that might have helped gain it a Hugo Award.[citation needed]
Bantam Books' 14th and final printing of the novel was in 1990. After this it was out of print until 2001, when Gollancz reissued it as part of their SF Masterworks line.[19] In 2002, Vintage published a new edition with some textual changes. The Library of America included it in their 2019 anthology American Science Fiction: Four Classic Novels 1968–1969,[20] and in 2022 Centipede Press published a limited hardback edition including tarot cards designed by Russell FitzGerald, who created the original cover art.[21]


### Textual changes
In the original novel, Lorq's crew member Brian disappears without explanation after a single chapter. In later editions, Prince sends Lorq a message while he is visiting the Alkane museum, describing how, with no more provocation than a careless comment Brian made about Prince's arm, he used his wealth and power to systematically destroy Brian's life until he became homeless and died of exposure. Prince claims that he has killed some two dozen others in a similar manner for similar reasons.
This passage significantly alters Prince's characterization. In the first edition, the worst that could be said of Prince is that he had been "spoiled" and had a violent temper. The new material turns him into a remorseless murderer and adds a moral component to Lorq's quest absent in the earlier versions.
However, the above passage is in both the original typescript of Nova and Delany's handwritten version of the novel in his notebooks from 1967. These are in the Samuel R. Delany papers in the Beinecke Rare Book and Manuscript Library, part of Yale University Library.[22] Delany omitted it when a friend who had read the manuscript found the section too extreme. However, when Algis Budrys' review complained about Brian's absence, Delany decided to restore Prince's message to the novel so readers would know what happened to Brian. This was present in editions printed for book clubs a few months later.[23]
Additionally, in the first edition of Nova it is unclear whether or not Lorq's parents are still alive by the time the novel ends. When Lorq begins his quest, his mother is already dying of a degenerative disorder, but at the end he makes no mention of them, nor does he try to contact them. However, in another (much briefer) passage added in the Vintage Books edition, related to the above, Lorq has a memory that implies both of his parents and Aaron Red died during the past ten years. This is in neither the original typescript nor in the notebook version, and is a true addition.


## Reception
Algis Budrys reviewed the novel in Galaxy Magazine, declaring that:
Samuel R. Delany, right now, as of this book, Nova, not as of some future book or some accumulated body of work, is the best science-fiction writer in the world, at a time when competition for that status is intense. I don't see how a writer can do more than wring your heart while explaining how it works. No writer can.
He praised Nova as "highly entertaining to read" and commended Delany's integration of his sociopolitical extrapolation into his story, his accomplished characterization, and his "virtuosity" in presenting the novel's "classically posed scientific puzzle".[24]
However, Judith Merril's review in The Magazine of Fantasy and Science Fiction was mixed. She noted the variety of readings it allowed and experiences it detailed:
Here are (at least some of) the ways you can read Nova: as fast-action far-flung interstellar adventure; as archetypal mystical/mythical allegory (in which the Tarot and the Grail both figure prominently); as modern myth told in the SF idiom ... The reader observes, recollects, or participates in a range of personal human experience including violent pain and disfigurement, sensory deprivation and overload, man-machine communion, the drug experience, the creative experience—and interpersonal relationships which include incest and assassination, father-son, leader-follower, human-pet, and lots more.
However, she described it as "more of a fascinating exercise than a satisfying achievement" and "somehow lacking".[14] Kirkus Reviews said that though Delany had "an extensive imagination", the reader might be overwhelmed.[25] The review in the British New Wave magazine New Worlds by M. John Harrison, while acknowledging the skill and energy with which it had been written, critiqued it for being "bedded in the genre's most stifling traditions."[26]
Nova was soon regularly referred to as "the perfect science fiction novel".[27] It was nominated for the Hugo Award for Best Novel in 1969.[1] In 1984, David Pringle listed it as one of the 100 best science-fiction novels written since 1949.[28]
Jo Walton wrote articles about Nova on Tor.com in 2009 and 2010, describing it as "one of the best of Delany's early works" and noting that it had aged well and felt "cutting edge". She called the setting "a fully realised and kaleidoscopic future" with "surprisingly interesting economics". However, she thought the female characters were few and poorly developed.[6][9] Alan Brown also reviewed the novel for Tor.com in 2018, opining that it was "a classic of the genre" with few obvious anachronisms.[5] Marian Womack described it as a "SF classic" that "feels more prescient than ever" in 2025.[29]


## Influence
Nova is considered one of the major forerunners of the cyberpunk movement.[30][31]: 208, 216, 264, 331 It prefigures, for instance, cyberpunk's staple motif of humans interfacing with computers via implants; however, in Nova these are not used to enter cyberspace but to control physical machinery.[5]
William Gibson has said he was influenced by Delany,[31]: 279 and Nova has been described as the stylistic bridge between Alfred Bester's The Stars My Destination and Gibson's Neuromancer.[31]: 20 Neuromancer includes allusions to Nova. The character Peter Riviera resembles the Mouse in that he also has holographic projection powers (although via implants) and is introduced in Istanbul; but unlike Delany's character, he is a psychopath. Likewise, Gibson includes a character who awkwardly wears only one shoe; this character, Ashpool, is an insane killer.[citation needed]


## Adaptation
In 2023, it was reported that Neil Gaiman was adapting the novel into an Amazon Prime Video series.[32]


## References
^ a b "1969 Hugo Awards". The Hugo Awards. July 26, 2007. Retrieved July 19, 2023.
^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p q r s t u Delany, Samuel R. (2022) [First published 1968]. Nova. Vintage.
^ a b Nicholls, Peter (October 3, 2022). "Delany, Samuel R.". In Clute, John; Langford, David (eds.). The Encyclopedia of Science Fiction (4th ed.). Retrieved July 23, 2023.
^ Fox, Robert Elliot (1996). "Meditations on Dhalgren". In Sallis, James (ed.). Ash of Stars: On the Writing of Samuel R. Delany. University Press of Mississippi. p. 102.
^ a b c d Brown, Alan (March 29, 2018). "Destruction and Renewal: Nova by Samuel R. Delany". Tor.com. Tor. Retrieved July 20, 2023.
^ a b c d e Walton, Jo (November 4, 2010). "Overloading the senses: Samuel Delany's Nova". Tor.com. Tor. Retrieved July 20, 2023.
^ Sheppard, R. Z. (March 29, 1971). "Books: Future Grok". Time. Retrieved July 23, 2023.
^ a b c d e f Rivera, Lysa M. (2020). "Labour Imaginaries in Samuel R. Delany's Nova". Canadian Review of American Studies. 50 (2): 241–256. doi:10.3138/cras.2018.021. S2CID 213789862.
^ a b Walton, Jo (May 31, 2009). "Scintillations of a sensory syrynx: Samuel Delany's Nova". Tor. Retrieved July 20, 2023.
^ Miesel, Sandra (1971). "Samuel R. Delany's Use of Myth in "Nova"". Extrapolation. 12 (2): 86–93. doi:10.3828/extr.1971.12.2.86.
^ a b Nilon, Charles (Summer 1984). "The Science Fiction of Samuel R. Delany and the Limits of Technology". Black American Literature Forum. 18 (2): 62–68. doi:10.2307/2904128. JSTOR 2904128. Retrieved July 26, 2023.
^ Auger, Emily E. (Spring–Summer 2018). "An Annotated List of Fantasy Novels Incorporating Tarot (1968–1989)". Mythlore. 36 (2): 231–250. JSTOR 26809313. Retrieved July 24, 2023.
^ a b Garrison, John (Winter 2007). "Echoes of Influence: Music, Social Power, and the Law in Speculative Fiction". Journal of the Fantastic in the Arts. 17 (4): 321–333. JSTOR 44809217. Retrieved July 23, 2023.
^ a b Merril, Judith (November 1968). "Books". The Magazine of Fantasy and Science Fiction. pp. 43–46. Retrieved July 21, 2023.
^ a b c Alterman, Peter S. (March 1977). "The Surreal Translations of Samuel R. Delany". Science Fiction Studies. 4 (1): 25–34. JSTOR 4239064. Retrieved July 23, 2023.
^ a b Govan, Sandra Y. (Summer 1984). "The Insistent Presence of Black Folk in the Novels of Samuel R. Delany". Black American Literature Forum. 18 (2): 43–48. doi:10.2307/2904124. JSTOR 2904124. Retrieved July 26, 2023.
^ Tucker, Jeffrey A. (2004). A Sense of Wonder: Samuel R. Delany, Race, Identity, and Difference. Wesleyan University Press. pp. 40–41. ISBN 978-0819566898.
^ Delany, Samuel R. (August 1998). "Racism and Science Fiction". The New York Review of Science Fiction (120). Retrieved July 20, 2023.
^ Delany, Samuel R. (2001). Nova. Gollancz. ISBN 9781857987423. Retrieved July 19, 2023.
^ "American Science Fiction: Four Classic Novels 1968-1969". Library of America. Retrieved July 20, 2023.
^ "Nova". Centipede Press. Retrieved July 20, 2023.
^ "Samuel R. Delany papers". Archives at Yale. Retrieved July 23, 2023.
^ Delany, Samuel R. (2021). Of Solids and Surds. Yale University Press. p. 18. ISBN 9780300250404. Retrieved July 22, 2023.
^ Budrys, Algis (January 1969). "Galaxy Bookshelf". Galaxy. pp. 189–92. Retrieved July 21, 2023.
^ "Nova". Kirkus Reviews. August 1, 1968. Retrieved July 24, 2023.
^ Review by M. John Harrison (1968) in New Worlds, December 1968, page 61.
^ Tabone, Mark A. (2013). "Beyond Triton: Samuel R. Delany's Critical Utopianism and the Colliding Worlds in "We, in Some Strange Power's Employ, Move on a Rigorous Line"". Utopian Studies. 24 (2): 184–215. doi:10.5325/utopianstudies.24.2.0184. ISSN 1045-991X. JSTOR 10.5325/utopianstudies.24.2.0184.
^ Pringle, David. Science Fiction : The 100 Best Novels : An English-Language Selection, 1949-1984. Carroll & Graf Publishers, 1985.
^ Womack, Marian (June 17, 2025). "8 Books About the Quiet Power of Libraries and Museums". Electric Literature. Retrieved June 18, 2025.
^ Nicholls, Peter (October 3, 2022). "Cyberpunk". In Clute, John; Langford, David (eds.). The Encyclopedia of Science Fiction (4th ed.). Retrieved July 22, 2023.
^ a b c McCaffery, Larry (1991). Storming the Reality Studio : a Casebook of Cyberpunk & Postmodern Science Fiction. Duke University Press. ISBN 0-8223-9822-2. OCLC 972009012.
^ Kesh, Jonathan (July 9, 2023). "Neil Gaiman Adapting Samuel R. Delany's Nova as a Series". CBR.com. Retrieved July 23, 2023.


## External links
Errata for Nova, approved by the author.
Nova at Worlds Without End
v
t
e
The Jewels of Aptor (1962)
The Ballad of Beta-2 (1965)
Empire Star (1966)
Babel-17 (1966)
The Einstein Intersection (1967)
Nova (1968)
Equinox (1973)
Dhalgren (1975)
Trouble on Triton (1976)
Stars in My Pocket Like Grains of Sand (1984)
They Fly at Çiron (1993)
The Mad Man (1994)
Hogg (1995)
Phallos (2004)
Dark Reflections (2007)
Through the Valley of the Nest of Spiders (2012)
Captives of the Flame (1963)
The Towers of Toron (1964)
City of a Thousand Suns (1965)
Tales of Nevèrÿon (1979)
Neveryóna, or: The Tale of Signs and Cities (1983)
Flight from Nevèrÿon (1985)
Return to Nevèrÿon (1987)
"Aye, and Gomorrah..." (1967)
"Time Considered as a Helix of Semi-Precious Stones" (1968)
Driftglass (1971)
Distant Stars (1981)
The Complete Nebula Award-Winning Fiction (1983)
Driftglass/Starshards (1993)
Atlantis: Three Tales (1995)
Aye, and Gomorrah, and other stories (2003)
Heavenly Breakfast (1979)
The Motion of Light in Water (1988)
The Straits of Messina (1989)
Silent Interviews (1995)
Longer Views (1996)
Times Square Red, Times Square Blue (1999)
Shorter Views (2000)


URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Do_Androids_Dream_of_Electric_Sheep%3F
Content:

Cyberpunk
science fiction
dystopia
Do Androids Dream of Electric Sheep? (retrospectively titled Blade Runner: Do Androids Dream of Electric Sheep? in some later printings) is a 1968 dystopian science fiction novel by American writer Philip K. Dick. It is set in a post-apocalyptic San Francisco, where Earth's life has been greatly damaged by a nuclear global war. The main plot follows Rick Deckard, a bounty hunter who has to "retire" (i.e. kill) six escaped Nexus-6 model androids, while a secondary plot follows John Isidore, a man of sub-par IQ who aids the fugitive androids.
The book served as the basis for the 1982 film Blade Runner and, even though some aspects of the novel were changed, many elements and themes from it were used in the film's 2017 sequel Blade Runner 2049.


## Plot summary
In a futuristic 1992 (2021 in later editions), after a global war that rendered Earth's atmosphere highly radioactive, most animal species are now endangered or extinct. As a result, owning real animals has become a fashionable and expensive status symbol, while poor people can only afford realistic electric robotic imitations of animals. Also, due to the radiation, people are encouraged to move to off-world colonies with the incentive of free androids: robot servants so similar in appearance to humans that only an empathy test can confirm their identities.
Rick Deckard, a bounty hunter for the San Francisco Police Department, is assigned to "retire" (kill) six defiant and violent androids of the new Nexus-6 model which have recently escaped from Mars and traveled to Earth. Deckard hopes this mission will earn him enough money to buy a live animal to replace his lone electric sheep, which would comfort his depressed wife Iran. First, Deckard visits the Seattle headquarters of the Rosen Association, which makes the androids, to confirm the accuracy of the empathy test on the new model. For business reasons, Rosen wishes to discredit the test and nearly succeeds. However, the test confirms twice that Rachael Rosen, his host in Seattle, is a Nexus-6 android, which she ultimately admits. Deckard returns to San Francisco to begin his hunt for the group of rebel androids.
Deckard meets and kills a Soviet police contact who turns out to be one of the Nexus-6 renegades in disguise. He then moves to kill his next target, an android living as an opera singer. Meeting her backstage, Deckard attempts to administer the test, but she calls the police, who arrest Deckard and detain him at a police station staffed with officers he is surprised to have never met. An official named Garland accuses Deckard himself of being an android with implanted memories. After a test conclusively proves that Deckard's work is legitimate, Garland draws a gun on Deckard and reveals that the entire station is a sham, claiming that both Deckard and Phil Resch, the station's resident bounty hunter, are also androids. Resch, unaware of Garland's revelation, shoots Garland in the head, escaping with Deckard back to the opera singer, whom Resch next retires in cold blood. Desperate to know the truth, Resch asks Deckard to administer the empathy test on him. The test indicates Resch has sociopathic tendencies but confirms he is human. Deckard then tests himself, confirming that he is also human but has a sense of empathy for certain androids.
Having killed three androids in a day, Deckard is now able to buy his wife Iran an authentic Nubian goat. His next target is an abandoned apartment building where the three remaining android fugitives are assumed to be hiding. Deckard suddenly experiences hallucinations of a man named Mercer, the main martyr-like character in a popular religious movement who is depicted as being continuously assailed by falling rocks. The vision of Mercer tells Deckard to proceed, despite the immorality of the mission. Deckard calls on Rachael Rosen since her knowledge of android psychology may aid his investigation. Rachael declines to help, but reluctantly agrees to meet Deckard at a hotel in exchange for him abandoning the case. At the hotel, she reveals that one of the fugitive androids is the same model as her, meaning that he will have to kill an android that looks like her. Despite having initial doubts about Rachael, Deckard has sex with her, after which they confess their love for each another. Rachael reveals she has slept with many bounty hunters, having been programmed to do so in order to dissuade them from their missions. Deckard threatens to kill her but ultimately holds back and leaves for the abandoned apartment building.
The three remaining android fugitives plan to outwit Deckard. The building's only other inhabitant, John R. Isidore, a radioactively damaged and intellectually below-average human, attempts to befriend them. He is shocked when they callously torture and mutilate a rare spider he discovers. Deckard enters the building, experiencing strange, supernatural vision again, notifying him of an ambush. When the androids attack him first, Deckard is legally justified to kill all three without testing them beforehand. Isidore is devastated and Deckard is rewarded for a record number of Nexus-6 kills in a day. Returning home, Deckard finds Iran grieving because, while he was away, Rachael stopped by their apartment and killed their goat.
Deckard travels to an uninhabited, obliterated region near the border with Oregon to reflect. He climbs a hill and is hit by falling rocks, realizing this is an experience eerily similar to the plight of the prophet Mercer. He stumbles upon a toad (an animal thought to be extinct) but, when he returns home with it, he is crestfallen when Iran discovers it is merely a robot. As he goes to sleep, she prepares to care for the electric toad anyway.


## Influence and inspiration
Dick intentionally imitates noir fiction styles of scene delivery, a hard-boiled investigator dealing coldly with a brutal world full of corruption and stupidity.[1] Another influence on Dick was author Theodore Sturgeon, writer of More Than Human, a surrealistic story of humanity broken into different tiers, one controlling another through telepathic means. A few years after the publication of Do Androids Dream of Electric Sheep?, the author spoke about man's animate creations in a famous 1972 speech: "The Android and the Human":
Our environment – and I mean our man-made world of machines, artificial constructs, computers, electronic systems, interlinking homeostatic components – all of this is in fact beginning more and more to possess what the earnest psychologists fear the primitive sees in his environment: animation. In a very real sense our environment is becoming alive, or at least quasi-alive, and in ways specifically and fundamentally analogous to ourselves... Rather than learning about ourselves by studying our constructs, perhaps we should make the attempt to comprehend what our constructs are up to by looking into what we ourselves are up to[2]
In the novel, the android antagonists are indeed more human than the human protagonist, intentionally. They are a mirror held up to human action, contrasted with a culture losing its own humanity.[3]


### Influence
Do Androids Dream of Electric Sheep? influenced generations of science fiction writers, becoming a founding document of the new wave science fiction movement as well as a basic model for its cyberpunk heirs. It influenced other genres such as scifi-based metal from artists including Rob Zombie and Powerman 5000.


### Adaptations
Hampton Fancher and David Peoples wrote a loose cinematic adaptation that became the film Blade Runner, released in 1982, featuring several of the novel's characters. It was directed by Ridley Scott. Following the international success of the film, the title Blade Runner was adopted for some later editions of the novel, although the term itself was not used in the original.[4] This movie led to a sequel in 2017 entitled Blade Runner 2049 which retains many themes of the novel.
As part of their Dangerous Visions dystopia series in 2014, BBC Radio 4 broadcast a two-part adaptation of the novel. It was produced and directed by Sasha Yevtushenko from an adaption by Jonathan Holloway. It stars James Purefoy as Rick Deckard and Jessica Raine as Rachael Rosen.[5] The episodes were originally broadcast on Sunday 15 June and 22 June 2014.
The novel has been released in audiobook form at least twice. A version was released in 1994 that featured Matthew Modine and Calista Flockhart.
A new audiobook version was released in 2007 by Random House Audio to coincide with the release of Blade Runner: The Final Cut. This version, read by Scott Brick, is unabridged and runs approximately 9.5 hours over eight CDs. This version is a tie-in, using the Blade Runner: The Final Cut film poster and Blade Runner title.[6]
A stage adaptation of the book, written by Edward Einhorn, ran from November 18 to December 10, 2010, at the 3LD Art & Technology Center in New York[7] and made its West Coast Premiere on September 13, 2013, playing until October 10 at the Sacred Fools Theater Company in Los Angeles.[8]
BOOM! Studios published a 24-issue comic book limited series based on Do Androids Dream of Electric Sheep? containing the full text of the novel and illustrated by artist Tony Parker.[9] The comic garnered a nomination for "Best New Series" from the 2010 Eisner Awards.[10] In May 2010, BOOM! Studios began serializing an eight-issue prequel subtitled Dust To Dust, written by Chris Roberson and drawn by Robert Adler.[11] The story takes place in the days immediately after World War Terminus.[12]


## Sequels
Three novels intended as sequels to both Do Androids Dream of Electric Sheep? and Blade Runner have been published:
Blade Runner 2: The Edge of Human (1995)
Blade Runner 3: Replicant Night (1996)
Blade Runner 4: Eye and Talon (2000)
These official and authorized sequels were written by Dick's friend K. W. Jeter.[13] They continue the story of Rick Deckard and attempt to reconcile many of the differences between the novel and the 1982 film.


## Critical reception
Critical reception of Do Androids Dream of Electric Sheep? has been overshadowed by the popularity of its 1982 film adaptation, Blade Runner. Of those critics who focus on the novel, several nest it predominantly in the history of Philip K. Dick's body of work. In particular, Dick's 1972 speech "The Human and the Android" is cited in this connection. Jill Galvan[14] calls attention to the correspondence between Dick's portrayal of the narrative's dystopian, polluted, man-made setting and the description Dick gives in his speech of the increasingly artificial and potentially sentient or "quasi-alive" environment of his present. Summarizing the essential point of Dick's speech, Galvan argues, "[o]nly by recognizing how [technology] has encroached upon our understanding of 'life' can we come to full terms with the technologies we have produced" (414). As a "bildungsroman of the cybernetic age", Galvan maintains, Do Androids Dream of Electric Sheep? follows one person's gradual acceptance of the new reality. Christopher Palmer[15] emphasizes Dick's speech to bring to attention the increasingly dangerous risk of humans becoming "mechanical".[16] "Androids threaten reduction of what makes life valuable, yet promise expansion or redefinition of it, and so do aliens and gods".[16] Gregg Rickman[17] cites another, earlier, and lesser-known Dick novel that also deals with androids, We Can Build You, asserting that Do Androids Dream of Electric Sheep? can be read as a sequel.
John Nubbin reviewed Do Androids Dream of Electric Sheep? for Different Worlds magazine and stated that "In the future, the only way to tell androids from humans is through a delicate battery of tests, ones which examine the moral conscience of the subject. Those tested in tune with nature, and sensitive to it, will pass as human; those who aren't, won't. The problem is, with the differences between Dick's future and our present, most people today wouldn't pass the test. The questions the readers themselves will fail are interesting indicators of just how civilized we all are, and just how bizarre a sense of humor the author had."[18]
In a departure from the tendency among most critics to examine the novel in relation to Dick's other texts, Klaus Benesch[19] examined Do Androids Dream of Electric Sheep? primarily in connection with Jacques Lacan's essay on the mirror stage. There, Lacan claims that the formation and reassurance of the self depends on the construction of an Other through imagery, beginning with a double as seen in the mirror. The androids, Benesch argues, perform a doubling function similar to the mirror image of the self, but they do this on a social, not individual, scale. Therefore, human anxiety about androids expresses uncertainty about human identity and society. Benesch draws on Kathleen Woodward's[20] emphasis on the body to illustrate the shape of human anxiety about an android Other. Woodward asserts that the debate over distinctions between human and machine usually fails to acknowledge the presence of the body. "If machines are invariably contrived as technological prostheses that are designed to amplify the physical faculties of the body, they are also built, according to this logic, to outdo, to surpass the human in the sphere of physicality altogether".[21]
Sherryl Vint emphasizes the importance of animals for the novel's exploration of the alienation of humans from their authentic being. In wrestling with his role as a bounty hunter who is supposedly defending society from those who lack empathy, Deckard comes to realize the artificiality of the distinctions that have been used in American culture to exclude animals and "animalized" humans from ethical consideration. "The central role of animals in Do Androids Dream of Electric Sheep? and the issues of species being that they raise show the need to struggle for a different way of being in the world. This way resists commodification in our relations with one another and with nature to produce a better future, one in which humans might be fully human once again by repairing our social relations with animals and nature."[22]


## Awards and honors
1968 – Nebula Award nominee[23]
1998 – Locus Poll Award, All-Time Best SF Novel before 1990 (Place: 51)


## See also
Novels portal
1960s portal
Biorobotics
Penfield Mood Organ


## References
^ "Blade Runner's source material says more about modern politics than the movie does". October 5, 2017.
^ "The Android and the Human".
^ "Entering the Posthuman Collective in Philip K. Dick's Do Androids Dream of Electric Sheep?".
^ Sammon, Paul M (1996). Future Noir: the Making of Blade Runner. London: Orion Media. pp. 318–329. ISBN 0-06-105314-7.
^ "BBC Radio 4 - Dangerous Visions, Do Androids Dream of Electric Sheep?, Episode 2". bbc.co.uk. BBC Radio 4. June 28, 2014. Retrieved May 11, 2015.
^ Blade Runner (Movie-Tie-In Edition) by Philip K. Dick - Unabridged Compact Disc Random House, November 27, 2007. ISBN 978-0-7393-4275-6 (0-7393-4275-4).
^ "Do Androids Dream of Electric Sheep?". Untitled Theater Company #61. Retrieved January 1, 2014.
^ "Do Androids Dream of Electric Sheep?". Sacred Fools Theater Company. Retrieved January 1, 2014.
^ Philip K. Dick Press Release - BOOM! ANNOUNCES DO ANDROIDS DREAM OF ELECTRIC SHEEP? Archived September 20, 2012, at the Wayback Machine
^ Heller, Jason (April 9, 2010). "Eisner Award nominees announced". The A.V. Club. Retrieved July 24, 2013.
^ Langshaw, Mark (April 29, 2010). "BOOM! expands on 'Blade Runner' universe". Digital Spy.
^ "BOOM! Studios publishes 'Electric Sheep' prequel". Tyrell-corporation.pp.se. October 22, 2010. Retrieved July 24, 2013.
^ Jeter, K. W. "Summary Bibliography: K. W. Jeter".
^ Galvan, Jill (1997). "Entering the Postman Collective: Philip K. Dick's Do Androids Dream of Electric Sheep?". Science Fiction Studies. 24 (3): 413–429.
^ Palmer, Christopher (2003). Philip K. Dick: Exhilaration and Terror of the Postmodern. Liverpool: University of Liverpool Press. p. 259.
^ a b Palmer, Christopher (2003). Philip K. Dick: Exhilaration and Terror of the Postmodern. Liverpool: University of Liverpool Press. p. 225.
^ Rickman, Gregg (1995). "What Is This Sickness?": "Schizophrenia" and We Can Build You. Westport, Connecticut: Greenwood Press. pp. 143–157.
^ Nubbin, John (November 1982). "Books & Role-Playing". Different Worlds (25): 27.
^ Benesch, Klaus (1999). "Technology, Art, and the Cybernetic Body: The Cyborg as Cultural Other in Fritz Lang's "Metropolis" and Philip K. Dick's "Do Androids Dream of Electric Sheep?"". Amerikastudien. 44 (3): 379–392. JSTOR 41157479.
^ Woodward, Kathleen (1997). "Prosthetic Emotions". In Hoffman, Gerhard (ed.). Emotions in the Postmodern. Heidelberg: Alfred Hornung. pp. 75–107.
^ Woodward, Kathleen (1997). "Prosthetic Emotions". In Hoffman, Gerhard (ed.). Emotions in the Postmodern. Heidelberg: Alfred Hornung. p. 391.
^ Vint, Sherryl (2007). "Speciesism and Species Being in Do Androids Dream of Electric Sheep?". Mosaic: An Interdisciplinary Critical Journal. 40 (1): 125.
^ "1968 Award Winners & Nominees". Worlds Without End. Retrieved September 27, 2009.


## Further reading
Dick, Philip K. (1996) [1968]. Do Androids Dream of Electric Sheep?. New York: Ballantine Books. ISBN 0-345-40447-5.
Scott, Ridley (1982). Blade Runner. Warner Brothers.
The Electric Sheep screensaver software is an homage to Do Androids Dream of Electric Sheep?.
Do Androids Dream of Electric Sheep? at Worlds Without End
Philip K. Dick, The Little Black Box, 1964 - a short story depicting Mercerisms origin, published 4 years prior to "Do Androids Dream of Electric Sheep?"
Benesch, Klaus (1999). "Technology, Art, and the Cybernetic Body: The Cyborg As Cultural Other in Fritz Lang's Metropolis and Philip K. Dick's Do Androids Dream of Electric Sheep". Amerikastudien. 44 (3): 379–392. JSTOR 41157479.
Butler, Andrew M. (1991). "Reality versus Transience: An Examination of Philip K. Dick's Do Androids Dream of Electric Sheep? and Ridley Scott's Blade Runner". In Merrifield, Jeff (ed.). Philip K. Dick: A Celebration (Programme Book). Epping Forest College, Loughton: Connections.
Gallo, Domenico (2002). "Avvampando gli angeli caddero: Blade Runner, Philip K. Dick e il cyberpunk". In Bertetti; Scolari (eds.). Lo sguardo degli angeli: Intorno e oltre Blade Runner (in Italian). Torino: Testo & Immagine. pp. 206–218. ISBN 88-8382-075-4.
Galvan, Jill (1997). "Entering the Posthuman Collective in Philip K. Dick's Do Androids Dream of Electric Sheep?". Science-Fiction Studies. 24 (3): 413–429. JSTOR 4240644.
McCarthy, Patrick A. (1999–2000). "Do Androids Dream of Magic Flutes?". Paradoxa. 5 (13–14): 344–352.
Niv, Tal (2014). "The Return of a Terrifying and Wonderful Creation On Our Future and Our Present". Haaretz. (Hebrew) Critical analysis of the 2014 edition of Do Androids Dream of Electric Sheep?
Street, Joe (2020). "Do Androids Dream of Black Sheep?: Reading Race into Philip K. Dick". Foundation. 49 (3): 44–61.
Vint, Sherryl (2007). "Speciesism and Species Being in Do Androids Dream of Electric Sheep?". Mosaic. 40 (1): 111–26.


## External links
Do Androids Dream of Electric Sheep title listing at the Internet Speculative Fiction Database
Do Androids Dream of Electric Sheep? at the Internet Book List
Complete publication history and cover gallery
v
t
e
Bibliography
Lost works
Gather Yourselves Together (1950)
Voices from the Street (1952)
Solar Lottery (1954)
Mary and the Giant (1954)
The World Jones Made (1954)
Eye in the Sky (1955)
The Man Who Japed (1955)
A Time for George Stavros (1956)
Pilgrim on the Hill (1956)
The Broken Bubble (1956)
The Cosmic Puppets (1957)
Puttering About in a Small Land (1957)
Nicholas and the Higs (1958)
Time Out of Joint (1958)
In Milton Lumky Territory (1958)
Confessions of a Crap Artist (1959)
The Man Whose Teeth Were All Exactly Alike (1960)
Humpty Dumpty in Oakland (1960)
Vulcan's Hammer (1960)
Dr. Futurity (1960)
The Man in the High Castle (1961)
We Can Build You (1962)
Martian Time-Slip (1962)
Dr. Bloodmoney, or How We Got Along After the Bomb (1963)
The Game-Players of Titan (1963)
The Simulacra (1963)
The Crack in Space (1963)
Clans of the Alphane Moon (1964)
The Three Stigmata of Palmer Eldritch (1964)
The Zap Gun (1964)
The Penultimate Truth (1964)
The Unteleported Man (1964)
The Ganymede Takeover (1965)
Counter-Clock World (1965)
Do Androids Dream of Electric Sheep? (1966)
Nick and the Glimmung (1966)
Now Wait for Last Year (1966)
Ubik (1966)
Galactic Pot-Healer (1968)
A Maze of Death (1968)
Our Friends from Frolix 8 (1969)
Flow My Tears, the Policeman Said (1974)
Deus Irae (1976)
Radio Free Albemuth (1976; published 1985)
A Scanner Darkly (1977)
Valis (1981)
The Divine Invasion (1981)
The Transmigration of Timothy Archer (1982)
The Owl in Daylight (unfinished)
A Handful of Darkness (1955)
The Variable Man (1956)
The Preserving Machine (1969)
The Book of Philip K. Dick (1973)
The Best of Philip K. Dick (1977)
The Golden Man (1980)
Robots, Androids, and Mechanical Oddities (1984)
I Hope I Shall Arrive Soon (1985)
The Collected Stories of Philip K. Dick (1987)
Beyond Lies the Wub (1988)
The Dark Haired Girl (1989)
The Father-Thing (1989)
Second Variety (1989)
The Days of Perky Pat (1990)
The Little Black Box (1990)
The Short Happy Life of the Brown Oxford (1990)
We Can Remember It for You Wholesale (1990)
The Minority Report (1991)
Second Variety (1991)
The Eye of the Sibyl (1992)
The Philip K. Dick Reader (1997)
Minority Report (2002)
Selected Stories of Philip K. Dick (2002)
Paycheck (2004)
Vintage PKD (2006)
The Exegesis of Philip K. Dick (2011)
"Beyond Lies the Wub" (1952)
"The Gun" (1952)
"The Skull" (1952)
"The Little Movement" (1952)
"The Defenders" (1953)
"Mr. Spaceship" (1953)
"Piper in the Woods" (1953)
"Roog" (1953)
"The Infinites" (1953)
"Second Variety" (1953)
"Colony" (1953)
"The Cookie Lady" (1953)
"Impostor" (1953)
"Paycheck" (1953)
"The Preserving Machine" (1953)
"Expendable" (1953)
"The Indefatigable Frog" (1953)
"The Commuter" (1953)
"Out in the Garden" (1953)
"The Great C" (1953)
"The King of the Elves" (1953)
"The Trouble with Bubbles" (1953)
"The Variable Man" (1953)
"The Impossible Planet" (1953)
"Planet for Transients" (1953)
"The Builder" (1953)
"Tony and the Beetles" (1953)
"The Hanging Stranger" (1953)
"Prize Ship" (1954)
"Beyond the Door" (1954)
"The Crystal Crypt" (1954)
"The Short Happy Life of the Brown Oxford" (1954)
"The Golden Man" (1954)
"Sales Pitch" (1954)
"Breakfast at Twilight" (1954)
"The Crawlers" (1954)
"Exhibit Piece" (1954)
"Adjustment Team" (1954)
"Shell Game" (1954)
"Meddler" (1954)
"A World of Talent" (1954)
"The Last of the Masters" (1954)
"Upon the Dull Earth" (1954)
"The Father-thing" (1954)
"Strange Eden" (1954)
"The Turning Wheel" (1954)
"Foster, You're Dead!" (1955)
"Human Is" (1955)
"War Veteran" (1955)
"Captive Market" (1955)
"Nanny" (1955)
"The Chromium Fence" (1955)
"Service Call" (1955)
"The Mold of Yancy" (1955)
"Autofac" (1955)
"Psi-man Heal My Child!" (1955)
"The Hood Maker" (1955)
"The Minority Report" (1956)
"Pay for the Printer" (1956)
"A Glass of Darkness (The Cosmic Puppets)" (1956)
"The Unreconstructed M" (1957)
"Null-O" (1958)
"Explorers We" (1959)
"Recall Mechanism" (1959)
"Fair Game" (1959)
"War Game" (1959)
"All We Marsmen" (1963)
"What'll We Do with Ragland Park?" (1963)
"The Days of Perky Pat" (1963)
"If There Were No Benny Cemoli" (1963)
"Waterspider" (1964)
"Novelty Act" (1964)
"Oh, to Be a Blobel!" (1964)
"The War with the Fnools" (1964)
"What the Dead Men Say" (1964)
"Orpheus with Clay Feet" (1964)
"Cantata 140" (1964)
"The Unteleported Man" (1964)
"The Little Black Box" (1964)
"Retreat Syndrome" (1965)
"Project Plowshare (later "The Zap Gun")" (1965)
"We Can Remember It for You Wholesale" (1966)
"Holy Quarrel" (1966)
"Faith of Our Fathers" (1967)
"Not by Its Cover" (1968)
"The Electric Ant" (1969)
"A. Lincoln, Simulacrum" (1969)
"The Pre-persons" (1974)
"A Little Something for Us Tempunauts" (1974)
"The Exit Door Leads In" (1979)
"Rautavaara's Case" (1980)
"I Hope I Shall Arrive Soon" (1980)
"The Eye of the Sibyl" (1987)
"Stability" (1987)
"The Android and the Human" (1972)
"If You Find This World Bad, You Should See Some of the Others" (1977)
Blade Runner (1982)
Total Recall (1990)
Barjo (1992)
Screamers (1995)
Impostor (2001)
Minority Report (2002)
Paycheck (2003)
A Scanner Darkly (2006)
Next (2007)
Screamers: The Hunting (2009)
Radio Free Albemuth (2010)
The Adjustment Bureau (2011)
Total Recall (2012)
Blade Runner 2049 (2017)
2036: Nexus Dawn (2017)
2048: Nowhere to Run (2017)
Blade Runner Black Out 2022 (2017)
Total Recall 2070 (1999)
The Man in the High Castle (2015–2019)
Minority Report (2015)
Electric Dreams (2017–2018)
Blade Runner: Black Lotus (2021–2022)
Blade Runner 2099 (upcoming)
Blade Runner franchise
Only Apparently Real (1986 biography)
I Am Alive and You Are Dead (1993 biography)
Your Name Here (2008 drama film)
Isa Dick Hackett (daughter)
Philip K. Dick Award
Category
v
t
e
Blade Runner (1982) themes versions soundtrack Tears in rain monologue
themes
versions
soundtrack
Tears in rain monologue
Blade Runner 2049 (2017) accolades soundtrack
accolades
soundtrack
Blade Runner 2: The Edge of Human (1995)
Blade Runner 3: Replicant Night (1996)
Blade Runner 4: Eye and Talon (2000)
2036: Nexus Dawn (2017)
2048: Nowhere to Run (2017)
Blade Runner Black Out 2022 (2017)
Blade Runner: Black Lotus (2021–22)
Blade Runner 2099 (TBA)
Rick Deckard
Blade Runner (1985)
Blade Runner (1997)
Blade Runner 2033: Labyrinth (upcoming)
A Marvel Comics Super Special
Do Androids Dream of Electric Sheep?
Dust to Dust
Penfield mood organ
Replicant
Spinner
Soldier (1998)
Category
VIAF
Germany
United States
France
BnF data
Australia
Sweden
Poland
Israel
MusicBrainz work


URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Camp_Concentration
Content:

Camp Concentration is a 1968 science fiction novel by American author Thomas M. Disch.[1] After being serialized in New Worlds in 1967, it was published by Hart-Davis in the UK in 1968 and by Doubleday in the US in 1969. Translations have been published in Dutch, French,[2] German, Spanish, Italian,[3] Serbian[4] and Polish.[5]
The book is set during a war, projected from the Vietnam War, in which the United States is apparently criminally involved (it is noted at one point that the US is waging germ warfare in "the so-called neutral countries"). The President of the United States during this fictional war is Robert McNamara.


## Plot summary
In Part I, poet, lapsed Catholic and conscientious objector Louis Sacchetti is sent to a secret military installation called Camp Archimedes, where military prisoners are injected with a form of syphilis intended to make them geniuses (hence the punning reference to "concentration" in the novel's title). By breaking down rigid categories in the mind (according to a definition of genius put forward by Arthur Koestler), the disease makes the thought process both faster and more flexible; it also causes physical breakdown and, within nine months, death.
The book is told in the form of Sacchetti's diary, and includes literary references to the story of Faust (at one point the prisoners stage Christopher Marlowe's Doctor Faustus and Sacchetti's friendship with ringleader Mordecai Washington parallels Faust's with Mephistopheles). It only becomes clear that Sacchetti himself has syphilis as his diary entries refer to his increasingly poor health, and become progressively more florid, until almost descending into insanity.
In Part II, after a test run on the prisoners, a megalomaniac nuclear physicist has himself injected with the disease, joins Camp Archimedes with his team of student helpers, and sets about trying to end the human race.
The prisoners in the book appear to be fascinated by alchemy, which they used as an elaborate cover for their escape plans. Sacchetti, who is obese, has a number of ironic visions involving other obese historical and intellectual figures, such as Thomas Aquinas.


## Allusions and sources
The book is seen as an example of New Wave modernism.[6] In addition to the staging of Marlowe's play, the book alludes to Thomas Mann's novel Doctor Faustus, which is about a composer named Adrian Leverkühn who intentionally contracts syphilis. Disch's book mentions a female composer named Adrienne Leverkuhn.[7]


## References
^ Tuck, Donald H. (1974). The Encyclopedia of Science Fiction and Fantasy. Chicago: Advent. p. 144. ISBN 0-911682-20-1.
^ "Marcel BATTIN - Bibliographie Livres - Biographie - nooSFere". www.noosfere.org. Retrieved September 3, 2020.
^ "Title: Camp Concentration". www.isfdb.org. Retrieved September 3, 2020.
^ "COBISS/OPAC". www.vbs.rs. Retrieved September 7, 2016.
^ "Trzynasty Schron - Thomas M. Disch - Obóz koncentracji - Postapokalipsa i Fallout".
^ Steble, Janez. (2014). Novi val v znanstveni fantastiki ali eksplozija žanra New wave in science fiction or the explosion of the genre : doktorska disertacija. [J. Steble]. OCLC 898669235.
^ Delany, Samuel (2009) [1977]. "Faust and Archimedes". The Jewel-Hinged Jaw. Wesleyan. p. 49. ISBN 978-0-8195-6883-0. Retrieved October 21, 2010.


## External links
Camp Concentration title listing at the Internet Speculative Fiction Database


URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Final_Programme
Content:

The Final Programme is a novel by British science fiction and fantasy writer Michael Moorcock. Written in 1965 as the underground culture was beginning to emerge, it was not published for several years. Moorcock has stated that publishers at the time considered it was "too freaky".[2]
It was the first of his Jerry Cornelius series of novels and stories[3] and was originally published in paperback in the US by Avon Books in 1968 then in London in hardback by Allison & Busby in October 1969.[1] It was made into a 1973 film of the same name (directed by Robert Fuest), but Moorcock was critical of the version released on the screen.[2]
Set in a world less abstract and chaotic than depicted in the later volumes, it introduces Jerry Cornelius as a hip super agent playboy and follows his adventures as he attempts to subvert a plot by his disreputable brother Frank and Miss Brunner to build a super computer for nefarious ends. Jerry is sucked into the plans of Miss Brunner to create the perfect being by merging the bodies of Jerry and herself together. When this is done, a radiantly charismatic hermaphroditic being emerges from the machinery. All who see the new creature fall quaking to their knees. As things turn out, Jerry discovers that "it's a tasty world".[4]
Contrary to the apparent chaos of the later Cornelius novels, The Final Programme is quite structured, being an alternative retelling of major episodes of the saga of Elric of Melniboné, with the various characters each taking roles similar to those of the earlier stories: Jerry as Elric, Catherine as Cymoril, and Miss Brunner as Stormbringer.
The first US edition (1968) of this work was censored.[5] The 1976 US edition of The Final Programme included an introduction by Norman Spinrad. The novel was first published in its revised form in 1979. In 2008 Moorcock published the original unpublished first draft of the first part of the novel as Phase 1: A Jerry Cornelius Story in his short story collection Elric: To Rescue Tanelorn published by Del Rey.


## Notes
^ a b isfdb
^ a b "The Final Programme + Q&A with Michael Moorcock", BFI.
^ Ralph Willett, "Moorcock's Achievement and Promise in the Jerry Cornelius Books", Science Fiction Studies, 8, Vol. 3, Part 1, March 1976.
^ The Complete Review
^ Modern Times 2.0 (2011), by Michael Moorcock, p. 116.


## References
Tuck, Donald H. (1978). The Encyclopedia of Science Fiction and Fantasy. Chicago: Advent. p. 317. ISBN 0-911682-22-8.
v
t
e
The Dreaming City (1961)
The Fireclown (1965)
The Jewel in the Skull (1967)
The Final Programme (1968)
The Mad God's Amulet (1968)
The Sword of the Dawn (1968)
The Runestaff (1969)
The Black Corridor (1969)
Behold the Man (1969)
The Chinese Agent (1970)
The Eternal Champion (1970)
Phoenix in Obsidian (1970)
The Warlord of the Air (1971)
A Cure for Cancer (1971)
The English Assassin: A Romance of Entropy (1972)
Elric of Melniboné (1972)
Breakfast in the Ruins (1972)
The Land Leviathan (1974)
The Adventures of Una Persson and Catherine Cornelius in the 20th Century (1976)
The Sailor on the Seas of Fate (1976)
The Condition of Muzak (1977)
Gloriana (1978)
Byzantium Endures (1981)
The War Hound and the World's Pain (1981)
The Steel Tsar (1981)
The Brothel in Rosenstrasse (1982)
The Laughter of Carthage (1984)
The City in the Autumn Stars (1986)
The Dragon in the Sword (1986)
Mother London (1988)
Jerusalem Commands (1992)
King of the City (2000)
Firing the Cathedral (2002)
The Vengeance of Rome (2006)
The Coming of the Terraphiles (2010)
The Whispering Swarm (2015)
The Time Dweller (1969)
The Lives and Times of Jerry Cornelius (1976)
The History of the Runestaff (1979)
The Dancers at the End of Time (1981)
A Nomad of the Time Streams (1982)
The Opium General and other stories (1984)
Elric: Song of the Black Sword (1995)
The Metatemporal Detective (2007)
Conan the Barbarian
Michael Moorcock's Multiverse
Tom Strong
England Invaded
Before Armageddon
Corum Jhaelen Irsei
Dorian Hawkmoon
Elric of Melniboné
Erekosë
Eternal Champion
Jerry Cornelius
Melniboné
Multiverse
Oswald Bastable
Stormbringer
Symbol of Chaos
Ulrich von Bek
Una Persson
New Worlds Fair
Warrior on the Edge of Time
Lucky Leif and the Longships
Mirrors
Cultösaurus Erectus
Hype
Sonic Attack
Zones
Live Chronicles
"Epic Pooh"
"Kings in Darkness"
The Land That Time Forgot
New Worlds
Airtight Garage
The Chronicle of the Black Sword
The Final Programme
Elric: Battle at the End of Time
Stormbringer RPG
Hawkmoon RPG
This article about a novel of the 1960s with a lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, or queer theme is a stub. You can help Wikipedia by expanding it.
See guidelines for writing about novels. Further suggestions might be found on the article's talk page.
v
t
e
This article about a 1960s science fiction novel is a stub. You can help Wikipedia by expanding it.
See guidelines for writing about novels. Further suggestions might be found on the article's talk page.
v
t
e


URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pavane_(novel)
Content:

Pavane is an alternative history science fiction fix-up novel by British writer Keith Roberts, first published by Rupert Hart-Davis Ltd in 1968. Most of the original stories were published in Impulse. An additional story, "The White Boat", was added in later editions.
Comprising a cycle of linked stories set in Dorset, England, it depicts a 20th century in which the Catholic Church still has supremacy; in its timeline, Protestantism was destroyed during wars that resulted from the aftermath of the assassination of Queen Elizabeth in 1588.


## Overview
The novel posits a history in which Queen Elizabeth I was assassinated just as the Spanish Armada was on its way. Protestant mobs attacked English Catholics who fought back in self-defense. With England engulfed in civil war, the Armada landed unopposed, the Spanish occupied England, suppressed Protestantism and imposed Roman Catholicism as the one and only religion. Without Protestant England, Spain prevented the Protestant Dutch Republic from attaining independence, while the German mercantile city states of the Holy Roman Empire that financed the Reformation were also suppressed. As a consequence, while Spanish power eventually wanes, the Catholic Church has no rivals and the pope becomes the effective secular, as well as spiritual, ruler over Europe. The Church thus also controls the restive "New World" (which approximates the United States in our timeline), as well as "Australasia", where James Cook planted the cobalt flag of the Throne of Peter, instead of the Union Flag, in the 18th century.
The social effects include a continuing feudal system and bans on innovation, particularly electricity, leading to a roughly mid-19th century technology with steam traction engines and mechanical semaphore telegraphy. Outlying areas are dangerous, with wild animals and occasional manifestations of the "Old Ones" or "People of the Hills" (supposed fairies) who leave crab-symbol graffiti. The stories take place at a period when the possibility of revolution is rumoured.
The location and flavour, nostalgic yet tragic in outlook, resemble a science-fictional equivalent of the fictionalized Wessex of Thomas Hardy (as in the Hardy stories, there are place-name differences; for instance, in Pavane Dorchester retains its Roman name, Durnovaria). Real geographical locations play a major role: Golden Cap is the site of a semaphore station, and the castle at Corfe is a key presence in the book.
Over all, the long arm of the popes reached out to punish and reward; the Church Militant remained supreme. But by the middle of the twentieth century widespread mutterings were making themselves heard. Rebellion was once more in the air . . .
The title alludes to the stately and melancholy dance, the pavane, the book being divided thematically into measures and a coda.
After a brief prologue explaining the back-story, the stories are:
"The Lady Margaret": a lonely steam haulier meets a friend from his past;
"The Signaller": an apprentice semaphore operator is assigned to a remote station;
"The White Boat" (not in all editions): a discontented fisher girl is obsessed with a mysterious yacht;
"Brother John": a monk becomes disaffected by the practices of the Inquisition;
"Lords and Ladies": a woman's bitter memories are evoked at the deathbed of the haulier from the first story, who is her uncle;
"Corfe Gate": an aristocrat, the daughter of the central female character in "Lords and Ladies", is involved in a regional rebellion.
The "Coda" is set some years after the events of the final stories, and centres on the son of the seneschal to the female aristocrat from "Corfe Gate".


## Reception
Pavane soon found an important place in the alternative history subgenre of science fiction and the work's high reputation continues; The Cambridge Companion to Science Fiction assesses it as "now credited as the finest of all 'alternative histories'".[1][2] Algis Budrys found the novel to be "a tapestry of a book; a marvel of storytelling", and concluded that, despite an unnecessary Coda, it was "a truly wonderful work".[3]


## See also
Times Without Number
Ruled Britannia


## References
^ Broderick, Damien (2003). James, Edward; Mendlesohn, Farah (eds.). The Cambridge companion to science fiction. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press. p. 57. ISBN 0-521-01657-6.
^ Reginald, Robert (January 1996). "Keith Roberts and the Pavane of history". Xenograffiti: essays on fantastic literature. I. O. Evans studies in the philosophy and criticism of literature. Vol. 33 (2 ed.). Rockville, MD: Borgo. p. 28. ISBN 0-8095-1900-3. …the best-conceived is Keith Roberts's masterpiece, Pavane…
^ "Galaxy Bookshelf", Galaxy Science Fiction, April 1969, pp. 116–18


## External links
Pavane Infinity Plus review.
Pavane Uchronia: The Alternate History List detailed summary and international bibliography.
Pavane title listing at the Internet Speculative Fiction Database


URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Heroes_and_Villains_(novel)
Content:

Heroes and Villains is a 1969 post-apocalyptic novel by Angela Carter.


## Synopsis
In a post-apocalyptic world, Marianne inhabits an enclave of relative civilisation as the daughter of one of the "Professors", academic survivors of the unnamed global disaster, whose enclave is guarded by a soldier caste. At the beginning of the novel, Marianne has lost her brother and mother, and only her father survives. However, she has become tired of the sedentary lifestyle and runs away from the enclave to join Jewel, an articulate and intelligent leader of a barbarian tribe, but then becomes concerned at her chattel status in a society that has rigid patriarchal concepts of what constitutes appropriate gender roles. Marianne becomes pregnant after Jewel sexually assaults her but she then sexually assaults an intellectually disabled male tribal member. Ultimately Jewel dies, and Marianne plans to become tribal leader.[1]


## Reception
Writing for The New York Times, Richard Boston found Heroes and Villains to be "a strange, compelling book ... a fable that discusses the roles of reason and imagination in a civilized society." He reported it to be "an undoubted success," saying "Carter tells her story with considerable skill. Her observation is sharp, and she writes extremely well."[2]
Theodore Sturgeon reviewed the novel favourably, praising Carter's "vivid colour, her familiarity with her scene, the unexpectedness of her characters and plot development."[3]


## References
^ "Heroes and Villains - Angela Carter". Complete Review. Retrieved 22 September 2024.
^ "They Survived a Nuclear War". archive.nytimes.com. Retrieved 21 March 2024.
^ "Galaxy Bookshelf", Galaxy Science Fiction, December 1973, p.69
v
t
e
Shadow Dance
The Magic Toyshop
Several Perceptions
Heroes and Villains
Love
The Infernal Desire Machines of Doctor Hoffman
The Passion of New Eve
Nights at the Circus
Wise Children
Fireworks: Nine Profane Pieces
The Bloody Chamber
Black Venus
American Ghosts and Old World Wonders
Burning Your Boats
The Curious Room
The Holy Family Album
The Donkey Prince
Comic and Curious Cats
The Sadeian Woman and the Ideology of Pornography
The Company of Wolves
The Magic Toyshop
Anagrams of Desire

This article about a 1960s science fiction novel is a stub. You can help Wikipedia by expanding it.
See guidelines for writing about novels. Further suggestions might be found on the article's talk page.
v
t
e


URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Left_Hand_of_Darkness
Content:

The Left Hand of Darkness is a science fiction novel by the American writer Ursula K. Le Guin. Published in 1969, it became immensely popular and established Le Guin's status as a major author of science fiction.[7] The novel is set in the fictional universe of the Hainish Cycle, a series of novels and short stories by Le Guin, which she introduced in the 1964 short story "The Dowry of Angyar". It was fourth in writing sequence among the Hainish novels, preceded by City of Illusions and followed by The Word for World Is Forest.[4]
The novel follows the story of Genly Ai, a human native of Terra, who is sent to the planet of Gethen as an envoy of the Ekumen, a loose confederation of planets. Ai's mission is to persuade the nations of Gethen to join the Ekumen, but he is stymied by a limited understanding of their culture. Individuals on Gethen are ambisexual, with no fixed sex; this situation has a strong influence on the planet's culture, and it creates a barrier of understanding for Ai.
The Left Hand of Darkness was among the first books in the genre now known as feminist science fiction, and it is described as the most famous examination of androgyny in science fiction.[8] A major theme of the novel is the effect of sex and gender on culture and society, explored particularly through the relationship between Ai and Estraven, a Gethenian politician who trusts and helps Ai. When the book was first published, the gender theme touched off a feminist debate over the depiction of the ambisexual Gethenians. The novel also explores the interaction between the unfolding loyalties of its two main characters; the loneliness and rootlessness of Ai; and the contrast between the religions of Gethen's two major nations.
The Left Hand of Darkness has been reprinted more than 30 times,[9] and it has received high praise from reviewers. In 1970, it was awarded the Hugo and Nebula Awards for Best Novel by fans and writers, respectively. Of the novel's impact, the literary critic Harold Bloom wrote, "Le Guin, more than Tolkien, has raised fantasy into high literature, for our time".[9] The scholar Donna White wrote that the book was a seminal work of science fiction, comparing it to Mary Shelley's novel Frankenstein.[10]


## Background
Le Guin's father Alfred Louis Kroeber and mother Theodora Kroeber were scholars, and exposure to their anthropological work considerably influenced Le Guin's writing.[11][12] The protagonists of many of Le Guin's novels, such as The Left Hand of Darkness and Rocannon's World, are also anthropologists or social investigators of some kind.[13] Le Guin used the term Ekumen for her fictional alliance of worlds, a term coined by her father, who derived it from the Greek oikoumene to refer to Eurasian cultures that shared a common origin.[14]
Le Guin's interest in Taoism influenced much of her science fiction work. According to academic Douglas Barbour, the fiction of the Hainish universe (the setting for several of Le Guin's works) contain a theme of balance between light and darkness, a central theme of Taoism.[15] She was also influenced by her early interest in mythology, and her exposure to cultural diversity as a child. Her protagonists are frequently interested in the cultures they are investigating, and are motivated to preserve them rather than conquer them.[16] Authors who influenced Le Guin include Victor Hugo, Leo Tolstoy, Virginia Woolf, Italo Calvino, and Lao Tzu.[17]
Le Guin identified with feminism, and was interested in non-violence and ecological awareness. She participated in demonstrations against the Vietnam War and nuclear weapons. These sympathies can be seen in several of her works of fiction, including those in the Hainish universe.[17] The novels of the Hainish cycle frequently explore the effects of differing social and political systems, although according to lecturer Suzanne Reid, Le Guin displayed a preference for a "society that governs by consensus, a communal cooperation without external government".[18] Her fiction also frequently challenges accepted depictions of race and gender.[18]
The original 1969 edition of The Left Hand of Darkness did not contain an introduction. After reflecting on her work, Le Guin wrote in the 1976 edition that the genre of science fiction was not as "rationalist and simplistic" as simple extrapolation. Instead, she called it a "thought experiment" which presupposes some changes to the world, and probes their consequences.[19] The purpose of the thought experiment[19] is not to predict the future, but to "describe reality, the present world".[19] In this case, her thought experiment explores a society without men or women, where individuals share the biological and emotional makeup of both sexes.[18] Le Guin has also said that the genre in general allows exploration of the "real" world through metaphors and complex stories, and that science fiction can use imaginary situations to comment on human behaviors and relationships.[17]
In her new introduction to the Library of America reprint in 2017, the author wrote:
Up until 1968 I had no literary agent, submitting all my work myself. I sent The Left Hand of Darkness to Terry Carr, a brilliant editor newly in charge of an upscale Ace paperback line. His (appropriately) androgynous name led me to address him as Dear Miss Carr. He held no grudge about that and bought the book. That startled me. But it gave me the courage to ask the agent Virginia Kidd, who had praised one of my earlier books, if she’d consider trying to place The Left Hand of Darkness as a hardcover. She snapped it up like a cat with a kibble and asked to represent me thenceforth. She also promptly sold the novel in that format. I wondered seriously about their judgment. Left Hand looked to me like a natural flop. Its style is not the journalistic one that was then standard in science fiction, its structure is complex, it moves slowly, and even if everybody in it is called he, it is not about men. That's a big dose of "hard lit," heresy, and chutzpah, for a genre novel by a nobody in 1968.[20]


## Setting
The Left Hand of Darkness is set in the fictional Hainish universe, which Le Guin introduced in her first novel Rocannon's World, published in 1966. In this fictional history, human beings did not evolve on Earth, but on Hain. The people of Hain colonized many neighboring planetary systems, including Terra (Earth) and Gethen, possibly a million years before the setting of the novels. Some of the groups that "seeded" each planet were the subjects of genetic experiments, including on Gethen.[19] The planets subsequently lost contact with each other, for reasons that Le Guin does not explain.[21] Le Guin does not narrate the entire history of the Hainish universe at once, instead letting readers piece it together from various works.[22]
The novels, and other fictional works set in the Hainish universe, recount the efforts to re-establish a galactic civilization. Explorers from Hain as well as other planets use interstellar ships traveling nearly as fast as light. These take years to travel between planetary systems, although the journey is shortened for the travelers due to relativistic time dilation, as well as through instantaneous interstellar communication using the ansible, a device invented during the events described in The Dispossessed.[21] This galactic civilization is known as the "League of All Worlds" in works set earlier in the chronology of the series, and has been reconstructed as the "Ekumen" by the time the events in The Left Hand of Darkness take place.[21] During the events of the novel, the Ekumen is a union of 83 worlds, with some common laws.[22] At least two "thought experiments" are used in each novel. The first is the idea that all humanoid species had a common origin; they are all depicted as descendants of the original Hainish colonizers. The second idea is unique to each novel.[19]
The Left Hand of Darkness takes place many centuries in the future—no date is given in the book itself. Reviewers have suggested the year 4870 AD, based on extrapolation of events in other works, and commentary on her writing by Le Guin.[4] The protagonist of the novel, the envoy Genly Ai, is on a planet called Winter ("Gethen" in the language of its own people) to convince the citizens to join the Ekumen. Winter is, as its name indicates, a planet that is always cold.[23]
The inhabitants of Gethen are ambisexual humans; for twenty-four days (a period called somer in Karhidish, a Gethenian language) of each twenty-six-day lunar cycle, they are sexually latent androgynes. They only adopt sexual attributes once a month, during a period of sexual receptiveness and high fertility, called kemmer. During kemmer, they become sexually male or female, with no predisposition towards either,[24] although which sex they adopt can depend on context and relationships.[7] Throughout the novel Gethenians are described as "he", whatever their role in kemmer. This absence of fixed gender characteristics led Le Guin to portray Gethen as a society without war, and also without sexuality as a continuous factor in social relationships.[24][23] On Gethen, every individual takes part in the "burden and privilege" of raising children, and rape and seduction are almost absent.[23]


## Plot summary
The protagonist of the novel is Genly Ai, a male Terran native, who is sent to invite the planet Gethen to join the Ekumen, a coalition of humanoid worlds.[25] Ai travels to the Gethen planetary system on a starship which remains in solar orbit with Ai's companions, who are in stasis; Ai himself is sent to Gethen alone, as the "first mobile" or Envoy. Like all envoys of the Ekumen, he can "mindspeak"—a form of quasi-telepathic speech, which Gethenians are capable of, but of which they are unaware.[26] He lands in the Gethenian kingdom of Karhide, and spends two years attempting to persuade the members of its government of the value of joining the Ekumen. Karhide is one of two major nations on Gethen, the other being Orgoreyn.[b]
The novel begins the day before an audience that Ai has obtained with Argaven Harge, the king of Karhide. Ai manages this through the help of Estraven, the prime minister, who seems to believe in Ai's mission, but the night before the audience, Estraven tells Ai that he can no longer support Ai's cause with the king. Ai begins to doubt Estraven's loyalty because of his strange mannerisms, which Ai finds effeminate and ambiguous. The behavior of people in Karhide is dictated by shifgrethor, an intricate set of unspoken social rules and formal courtesy. Ai does not understand this system, thus making it difficult for him to understand Estraven's motives, and contributing to his distrust of Estraven.[27] The next day, as he prepares to meet the King, Ai learns that Estraven has been accused of treason, and exiled from the country. The pretext for Estraven's exile was his handling of a border dispute with the neighboring country of Orgoreyn, in which Estraven was seen as being too conciliatory. Ai meets with the king, who rejects his invitation to join the Ekumen.[28] Discouraged, Ai decides to travel through Karhide, as the spring has just begun, rendering the interior of the frozen country accessible.
Ai travels to a Fastness, a dwelling of people of the Handdarata, one of two major Gethenian religions. He pays the fastness for a foretelling, an art practiced to prove the "perfect uselessness of knowing the answer to the wrong question".[29][30] He asks if Gethen will be a member of the Ekumen in five years, expecting that the Foretellers will give him an ambiguous response, but he is answered "yes". This leads him to muse that the Gethenians have "trained hunch to run in harness".[31] After several months of travelling through Karhide, Ai decides to pursue his mission in Orgoreyn, to which he has received an invitation.
Ai reaches the Orgota capital of Mishnory, where he finds that the Orgota politicians are initially far more direct with him. He is given comfortable quarters, and is allowed to present his invitation to the council that rules Orgoreyn. Three members of the council, Shusgis, Obsle, and Yegey, are particularly supportive of him. These three are members of an "Open Trade" faction, which wants to end the conflict with Karhide. Estraven, who was banished from Karhide, is found working with these council members, and tells Ai that he was responsible for Ai's reception in Orgoreyn.[32] Despite the support, Ai feels uneasy. Estraven warns him not to trust the Orgota leaders, and he hears rumors of the "Sarf", or secret police, that truly control Orgoreyn. He ignores both his feeling and the warning, and is once again blindsided; he is arrested unexpectedly one night, interrogated, and sent to a far-northern labor camp where he suffers harsh cold, is forced into hard labor, and is given debilitating drugs. He becomes ill and his death seems imminent.
His captors expect him to die in the camp, but to Ai's great surprise, Estraven—whom Ai still distrusts—goes to great lengths to save him. Estraven poses as a prison guard and breaks Ai out of the farm, using his training with the Handdarata to induce dothe, or hysterical strength, to aid him in the process. Estraven spends the last of his money on supplies, and then steals more, breaking his own moral code. The pair begin a dangerous 80-day trek across the northern Gobrin ice sheet back to Karhide, because Estraven believes that the reappearance of Ai in Karhide will convince Karhide to accept the Ekumen treaty, knowing that Karhide will want the honor of doing so before Orgoreyn. Over the journey Ai and Estraven learn to trust and accept one another's differences. Ai is eventually successful in teaching Estraven mindspeech; Estraven hears Ai speaking in his mind with the voice of Estraven's dead sibling and lover Arek,[33] demonstrating the close connection that Ai and Estraven have developed. When they reach Karhide, Ai sends a radio transmission to his ship, which lands a few days later. Betrayed by a friend they had trusted to hide them, Estraven tries to cross the land border back into Orgoreyn, fearing pursuit, but is killed by border guards, who also capture Ai. Estraven's prediction is borne out when Ai's presence in Karhide triggers the collapse of governments in both Karhide and Orgoreyn—Orgoreyn's because its claim that Ai had died of a disease was shown to be false. Karhide agrees to join the Ekumen, followed shortly by Orgoreyn, completing Ai's mission.[34]


## Primary characters


### Genly Ai
Genly Ai is the protagonist of the novel; a male native of Terra, or Earth, who is sent to Gethen by the Ekumen as a "first mobile" or envoy. He is called "Genry" by the Karhiders, who have trouble pronouncing the sound [l]. He is described as rather taller and darker than the average Gethenian. Although curious and sensitive to Gethenian culture in many ways, he struggles at first to trust the ambisexual Gethenians. His own masculine mannerisms, learned on Terra, also prove to be a barrier to communication.[35] At the beginning of the book, he has been on Gethen for one year, trying to gain an audience with the king, and persuade the Karhidish government to believe his story. He arrives equipped with basic information about the language and culture from a team of investigators who had come before him.
In Karhide, the king is reluctant to accept his diplomatic mission. In Orgoreyn, Ai is seemingly accepted more easily by the political leaders, yet Ai is arrested, stripped of his clothes, drugged, and sent to a work camp.[35] Rescued by Estraven, the deposed Prime Minister of Karhide, Genly realizes that cultural differences—specifically shifgrethor, gender roles and Gethenian sexuality—had kept him from understanding their relationship previously. During their 80-day journey across the frozen land to return to Karhide, Ai learns to understand and love Estraven.[35]


### Estraven
Therem Harth rem ir Estraven is a Gethenian from the Domain of Estre in Kerm Land, at the southern end of the Karhidish half of the continent. He is the Prime Minister of Karhide at the very beginning of the novel, until he is exiled from Karhide after attempting to settle the Sinoth Valley border dispute with Orgoreyn. Estraven is one of the few Gethenians who believe Ai, and he attempts to help him from the beginning, but Ai's inability to comprehend shifgrethor leads to severe misunderstanding between them.
Estraven is said to have made a taboo kemmering vow (love pledge[36]) to his brother, Arek Harth rem ir Estraven, while they were both young. Convention required that they separate after they had produced a child together. Because of the first vow, a second vow Estraven made with Ashe Foreth, another partner, which was also broken before the events in Left Hand, is called a "false vow, a second vow".[37] In contrast to Ai, Estraven is shown with both stereotypically masculine and feminine qualities, and is used to demonstrate that both are necessary for survival.[9][23]


### Argaven
Argaven Harge XV is the king of Karhide during the events of the novel. He is described both by his subjects and by Estraven as being "mad".[35] He has sired seven children, but has yet to bear "an heir of the body, king son".[38] During the novel he becomes pregnant but loses the child soon after it is born, triggering speculation as to which of his sired children will be named his heir.[39] His behavior towards Ai is consistently paranoid; although he grants Ai an audience, he refuses to believe his story, and declines the offer to join the Ekumen. The tenure of his prime ministers tends to be short, with both Estraven and Tibe rising and falling from power during the two Gethenian years that the novel spans. Argaven eventually agrees to join the Ekumen due to the political fallout of Estraven's death and Ai's escape from Orgoreyn.


### Tibe
Pemmer Harge rem ir Tibe is Argaven Harge's cousin. Tibe becomes the prime minister of Karhide when Estraven is exiled at the beginning of the novel, and becomes the regent for a brief while when Argaven is pregnant. In contrast to Estraven, he seems intent on starting a war with Orgoreyn over the Sinnoth Valley dispute; as well as taking aggressive actions at the border, he regularly makes belligerent speeches on the radio. He is strongly opposed to Ai's mission. He orders Estraven to be killed at the border at the end of the novel, as a last act of defiance, knowing that Estraven and Ai's presence in Karhide means his own downfall; he resigns immediately after Estraven's death.[40]


### Obsle, Yegey, and Shusgis
Obsle, Yegey, and Shusgis are Commensals, three of the thirty-three councillors that rule Orgoreyn. Obsle and Yegey are members of the "Open Trade" faction, who wish to normalize relations with Karhide. Obsle is the commensal of the Sekeve District, and was once the head of the Orgota Naval Trade Commission in Erhenrang, where he became acquainted with Estraven.[41] Estraven describes him as the nearest thing to an honest person among the politicians of Orgoreyn.[38] Yegey is the commensal who first finds Estraven during his exile, and who gives Estraven a job and a place to live in Mishnory. Shusgis is the commensal who hosts Genly Ai after Ai's arrival in Mishnory, and is a member of the opposing faction, which supports the Sarf, the Orgota secret police. Although Obsle and Yegey support Ai's mission, they see him more as a means of increasing their own influence within the council; thus they eventually betray him to the Sarf, in order to save themselves. Their Open Trade faction takes control of the council after Ai's presence in Karhide becomes known at the end of the novel.[40]


## Reception
The Left Hand of Darkness has received highly positive critical responses since its publication.[42] In 1970 it won both the Nebula Award, given by the Science Fiction Writers of America, and the Hugo Award, determined by science fiction fans.[23][43][10] In 1987, science fiction news and trade journal Locus ranked it number two among "All-Time Best SF Novels", based on a poll of subscribers.[44][c] The novel was also a personal milestone for Le Guin, with critics calling it her "first contribution to feminism". It was one of her most popular books for many years after its publication.[23] By 2014, the novel had sold more than a million copies in English.[46]
The book has been widely praised by genre commentators, academic critics, and literary reviewers.[42] Fellow science fiction writer Algis Budrys praised the novel as "a narrative so fully realized, so compellingly told, so masterfully executed". He found the book "a novel written by a magnificent writer, a totally compelling tale of human peril and striving under circumstances in which human love, and a number of other human qualities, can be depicted in a fresh context".[47] Darko Suvin, one of the first academics to study science fiction, wrote that Left Hand was the "most memorable novel of the year",[10] and Charlotte Spivack regards the book as having established Le Guin's status as a major science-fiction writer.[7] In 1987 Harold Bloom described The Left Hand of Darkness as Le Guin's "finest work to date", and argued that critics have generally undervalued it.[9] Bloom followed this up by listing the book in his The Western Canon (1994) as one of the books in his conception of artistic works that have been important and influential in Western culture.[48] In Bloom's opinion, "Le Guin, more than Tolkien, has raised fantasy into high literature, for our time".[9]
Critics have also commented on the broad influence of the book, with writers such as Budrys citing it as an influence upon their own writing.[49] More generally it has been asserted that the work has been widely influential in the science fiction field, with The Paris Review claiming that "No single work did more to upend the genre's conventions than The Left Hand of Darkness".[49] Donna White, in her study of the critical literature on Le Guin, argued that Left Hand was one of the seminal works of science fiction, as important as Frankenstein, by Mary Shelley, which is often described as the very first science fiction novel.[10] Suzanne Reid wrote that at the time the novel was written, Le Guin's ideas of androgyny were unique not only to science fiction, but to literature in general.[23]
Left Hand has been a focus of literary critique of Le Guin's work, along with her Earthsea fiction and utopian fiction.[10] The novel was at the center of a feminist debate when it was published in 1969.[50] Alexei Panshin objected to the use of masculine "he/him/his" gender pronouns to describe its androgynous characters, and called the novel a "flat failure".[10] Other feminists maintained that the novel did not go far enough in its exploration of gender.[10] Criticism was also directed at the portrayal of androgynous characters in the "masculine" roles of politicians and statesmen but not in family roles.[51] Sarah LeFanu, for example, wrote that Le Guin turned her back on an opportunity for experimentation. She stated that "these male heroes with their crises of identity, caught in the stranglehold of liberal individualism, act as a dead weight at the center of the novel".[52] Le Guin, who identified as a feminist, responded to these criticisms in her essay "Is Gender Necessary?" as well as by replacing masculine pronouns with feminine ones in a later reprinting of "Winter's King", an unconnected short story set on Gethen.[51] In her responses, Le Guin admitted to failing to depict androgynes in stereotypically feminine roles, but said that she considered and decided against inventing gender-neutral pronouns, because they would mangle the language of the novel.[10] In the afterword of the 25th anniversary edition of the novel, she stated that "The Left Hand of Darkness is haunted and bedeviled by the gender of its pronouns", and that she no longer believed that the masculine pronoun in English is generic, as she had when she wrote the book.[53]


## Themes


### Hainish universe themes
Le Guin's works set in the Hainish universe explore the idea of human expansion, a theme found in the future history novels of other science-fiction authors such as Isaac Asimov.[21] The Hainish novels, such as The Dispossessed, Left Hand, and The Word for World Is Forest, also frequently explore the effects of differing social and political systems.[18] Le Guin believed that contemporary society suffered from a high degree of alienation and division, and her depictions of encounters between races, such as in The Left Hand of Darkness, sought to explore the possibility of "improved mode of human relationships", based on "integration and integrity".[21] The Left Hand of Darkness explores this theme through the relationship between Genly Ai and Estraven; Ai initially distrusts Estraven, but eventually comes to love and trust him.[25] Le Guin's later Hainish novels also challenge contemporary ideas about gender, ethnic differences, the value of ownership, and human beings' relationship to the natural world.[23]


### Sex and gender
A prominent theme in the novel is social relations in a society in which gender is irrelevant; in Le Guin's words, she "eliminated gender, to find out what was left".[25] In her 1976 essay "Is Gender Necessary?", Le Guin wrote that the theme of gender was only secondary to the novel's primary theme of loyalty and betrayal. Le Guin revisited this essay in 1988, and stated that gender was central to the novel; her earlier essay had described gender as a peripheral theme because of the defensiveness she felt over using masculine pronouns for her characters.[10]
The novel also follows changes in the character of Genly Ai, whose behavior shifts away from the "masculine" and grows more androgynous over the course of the novel. He becomes more patient and caring, and less rigidly rationalist.[51] Ai struggles to form a bond with Estraven through much of the novel, and finally breaks down the barrier between them during their journey on the ice, when he recognizes and accepts Estraven's dual sexuality. Their understanding of each other's sexuality helps them achieve a more trusting relationship.[51] The new intimacy they share is shown when Ai teaches Estraven to mindspeak, and Estraven hears Ai speaking with the voice of Estraven's dead sibling (and lover) Arek.[51]
Feminist theorists criticized the novel for what they saw as a homophobic depiction of the relationship between Estraven and Ai. Both are presented as superficially masculine throughout the novel, but they never physically explore the attraction between them. Estraven's death at the end was seen as giving the message that "death is the price that must be paid for forbidden love".[14] In a 1986 essay, Le Guin acknowledged and apologized for the fact that Left Hand had presented heterosexuality as the norm on Gethen.[14]
The androgynous nature of the inhabitants of Gethen is used to examine gender relations in human society. On Gethen, the permanently male Genly Ai is an oddity, and is seen as a "pervert" by the natives; according to reviewers, this is Le Guin's way of gently critiquing masculinity.[23] Le Guin also seems to suggest that the absence of gender divisions leads to a society without the constriction of gender roles.[23] The Gethenians are not inclined to go to war, which reviewers have linked to their lack of sexual aggressiveness, derived from their ambisexuality.[9] According to Harold Bloom, "Androgyny is clearly neither a political nor a sexual ideal" in the book, but that "ambisexuality is a more imaginative condition than our bisexuality. ... the Gethenians know more than either men or women".[9] Bloom added that this is the major difference between Estraven and Ai, and allows Estraven the freedom to carry out actions that Ai cannot; Estraven "is better able to love, and freed therefore to sacrifice".[9]


### Religion
The book features two major religions: the Handdara, an informal system reminiscent of Taoism and Buddhism, and the Yomeshta or Meshe's cult, a close-to-monotheistic religion based on the idea of absolute knowledge of the entirety of time attained in one visionary instant by Meshe, who was originally a Foreteller of the Handdara, when attempting to answer the question: "What is the meaning of life?" The Handdara is the more ancient, and dominant in Karhide, while Yomesh is the official religion in Orgoreyn. The differences between them underlie political distinctions between the countries and cultural distinctions between their inhabitants. Estraven is revealed to be an adept of the Handdara.
Le Guin's interest in Taoism influenced much of her science fiction work. Douglas Barbour said that the fiction of the Hainish Universe contains a theme of balance between light and darkness, a central theme of Taoism.[15] The title The Left Hand of Darkness derives from the first line of a lay traditional to the fictional planet of Gethen:
Light is the left hand of darkness, and darkness the right hand of light. Two are one, life and death, lying together like lovers in kemmer, like hands joined together, like the end and the way.[54]
Suzanne Reid stated that this presentation of light and dark was in strong contrast to many western cultural assumptions, which believe in strongly contrasted opposites. She went on to say that Le Guin's characters have a tendency to adapt to the rhythms of nature rather than trying to conquer them, an attitude which can also be traced to Taoism.[16] The Handdarrata represent the Taoist sense of unity; believers try to find insight by reaching the "untrance", a balance between knowing and unknowing, and focusing and unfocusing.[23]
The Yomesh cult is the official religion of Orgoreyn, and worships light. Critics such as David Lake have found parallels between the Yomesh cult and Christianity, such as the presence of saints and angels, and the use of a dating system based on the death of the prophet.[55] Le Guin portrays the Yomesh religion as influencing the Orgota society, which Lake interprets as a critique of the influence of Christianity upon Western society.[55] In comparison to the religion of Karhide, the Yomesh religion focuses more on enlightenment and positive, obvious statements. The novel suggests that this focus on positives leads to the Orgota being not entirely honest, and that a balance between enlightenment and darkness is necessary for truth.[23]


### Loyalty and betrayal
Loyalty, fidelity, and betrayal are significant themes in the book, explored against the background of both planetary and interplanetary relations. Genly Ai is sent to Gethen as an envoy of the Ekumen, whose mission is to convince the various Gethenian nations that their identities will not be destroyed when they integrate with the Ekumen.[24] At the same time, the planetary conflict between Karhide and Orgoreyn is shown as increasing nationalism, making it hard for citizens of each country to view themselves as citizens of the planet.[24]
These conflicts are demonstrated by the varying loyalties of the main characters. Genly Ai tells Argaven after Estraven's death that Estraven served mankind as a whole, just as Ai did.[56] During the border dispute with Orgoreyn, Estraven tries to end the dispute by moving Karhidish farmers out of the disputed territory. Estraven believes that by preventing war he was saving Karhidish lives and being loyal to his country, while King Argaven sees it as a betrayal.[57] At the end of the novel Ai calls his ship down to formalize Gethen's joining the Ekumen, and feels conflicted while doing so because he had promised Estraven that he would clear Estraven's name before calling his ship down. His decision is an example of Le Guin's portrayal of loyalty and betrayal as complementary rather than contradictory, because in joining Gethen with the Ekumen, Ai was fulfilling the larger purpose that he shared with Estraven.[57] Donna White wrote that many of Le Guin's novels depict a struggle between personal loyalties and public duties, best exemplified in The Left Hand of Darkness, where Ai is bound by a personal bond to Estraven, but must subordinate that to his mission for the Ekumen and humanity.[58]
The theme of loyalty and trust is related to the novel's other major theme of gender. Ai has considerable difficulty in completing his mission because of his prejudice against the ambisexual Gethenians and his inability to establish a personal bond with them.[24] Ai's preconceived ideas of how men should behave prevents him from trusting Estraven when the two meet; Ai labels Estraven "womanly" and distrusts him because Estraven exhibits both masculine and feminine characteristics. Estraven also faces difficulties communicating with Ai, who does not understand shifgrethor, the Gethenians' indirect way of giving and receiving advice.[24] A related theme that runs through Le Guin's work is that of being rooted or rootless in society, explored through the experiences of lone individuals on alien planets.[13]


### Shifgrethorand communication
Shifgrethor is a fictional concept in the Hainish universe, first introduced in The Left Hand of Darkness. It is first mentioned by Genly Ai, when he thinks to himself "shifgrethor—prestige, face, place, the pride-relationship, the untranslatable and all-important principle of social authority in Karhide and all civilizations of Gethen".[27] It derives from an old Gethenian word for shadow, as prominent people are said to "cast darker [or longer] shadows". George Slusser describes shifgrethor as "not rank, but its opposite, the ability to maintain equality in any relationship, and to do so by respecting the person of the other".[59] According to University of West Georgia Professor Carrie B. McWhorter, shifgrethor can be defined simply as "a sense of honor and respect that provides the Gethenians with a way to save face in a time of crisis".[60]
Ai initially refuses to see a connection between his sexuality and his mode of consciousness, preventing him from truly understanding the Gethenians; thus he is unable to persuade them of the importance of his mission.[9] Ai's failure to comprehend shifgrethor and to trust Estraven's motives leads him to misunderstand much of the advice that Estraven gives him.[55] As Ai's relationship to Estraven changes, their communication also changes; they are both more willing to acknowledge mistakes, and make fewer assertions.[55] Eventually, the two are able to converse directly with mindspeech, but only after Ai is able to understand Estraven's motivations, and no longer requires direct communication.[55]


## Style and structure
The novel is framed as part of the report that Ai sends back to the Ekumen after his time on Gethen, and as such, suggests that Ai is selecting and ordering the material.[61] Ai narrates ten chapters in the first person; the rest are made up of extracts from Estraven's personal diary and ethnological reports from an earlier observer from the Ekumen, interspersed with Gethenian myths and legends.[61] The novel begins with the following statement from Ai, explaining the need for multiple voices in the novel:[61]
I'll make my report as if I told a story, for I was taught as a child on my homeworld that Truth is a matter of the imagination. The soundest fact may fail or prevail in the style of its telling: like that singular organic jewel of our seas, which grows brighter as one woman wears it and, worn by another, dulls and goes to dust. Facts are no more solid, coherent, round, and real, than pearls are. But both are sensitive. The story is not all mine, nor told by me alone. Indeed I am not sure whose story it is; you can judge better. But it is all one, and if at moments the facts seem to alter with an altered voice, why then you can choose the fact that you like the best; yet none of them are false, and it is all one story.[62]
The myths and legends serve to explain specific features about Gethenian culture, as well as larger philosophical aspects of society. Many of the tales used in the novel immediately precede chapters describing Ai's experience with a similar situation. For instance, a story about the dangers of foretelling is presented before Ai's own experience witnessing a foretelling.[51] Other stories include a retelling of the legend of the "place inside the storm" (about two lovers whose vow is broken when societal strictures cause one to kill themself[63]); another retelling the roots of the Yomeshta cult; a third is an ancient Orgota creation myth; a fourth is a story of one of Estraven's ancestors, which discusses what a traitor is. The presence of myths and legends has also been cited by reviewers who state that Le Guin's work, particularly Left Hand, is similar to allegory in many ways. These include the presence of a guide (Estraven) for the protagonist (Ai), and the use of myths and legends to provide a backdrop for the story.[11]
The heterogeneous structure of the novel has been described as "distinctly post-modern", and was unusual for the time of its publication,[10] in marked contrast to (primarily male-authored) traditional science fiction, which was straightforward and linear.[64] In 1999, literary scholar Donna White wrote that the unorthodox structure of the novel made it initially confusing to reviewers, before it was interpreted as an attempt to follow the trajectory of Ai's changing views.[13] Also in contrast to what was typical for male authors of the period, Le Guin narrated the action in the novel through the personal relationships she depicted.[13]
Ai's first-person narration reflects his slowly developing view, and the reader's knowledge and understanding of the Gethens evolves with Ai's awareness. He begins in naivety, gradually discovering his profound errors in judgement.[65] In this sense, the novel can be thought of as a Bildungsroman, or coming of age story.[66] Since the novel is presented as Ai's journey of transformation, Ai's position as the narrator increases the credibility of the story.[61] The narration is complemented by Le Guin's writing style, described by Bloom as "precise, dialectical—always evocative in its restrained pathos" which is "exquisitely fitted to her powers of invention".[9]


## Adaptations


### Film or TV (planned or optioned)
In December 2004, Phobos Entertainment acquired media rights to the novel and announced plans for a feature film and video game based on it.[67] In early 2017, the novel was picked up for production by Critical Content as a television limited series with Le Guin signed on as a consulting producer.[68]


### Theater and radio
In 2013, the Portland Playhouse and Hand2Mouth Theatre produced a stage adaptation of The Left Hand of Darkness in Portland, Oregon.[69] The first university production of Left Hand of Darkness premiered in the University of Oregon's Robinson Theater on November 3, 2017, with a script adapted by John Schmor.[70] Many works of the transgender artist Tuesday Smillie exhibited at the Rose Art Museum take inspiration from the book.[71][72]
On April 12 and 19, 2015, BBC Radio 4 broadcast a two-part adaptation of the novel, starring Kobna Holdbrook-Smith as Genly Ai, Lesley Sharp as Estraven, Toby Jones as Argaven, Ruth Gemmell as Ashe, Louise Brealey as Tibe and Gaum, Stephen Critchlow as Shusgis, and David Acton as Obsle. The radio drama was adapted by Judith Adams and directed by Allegra McIlroy.[73] The adaptation was created and aired as part of a thematic month centered on the life and works of Ursula Le Guin, in honor of her 85th birthday.[74][75]


## See also
Novels portal
Biology in fiction
Postgenderism
"Coming of Age in Karhide", an unconnected short story about Gethenians.


## Notes
^ This sequence refers to novels in the Hainish cycle. The short story "Winter's King" was published in 1969, between the publication of City of Illusions (1967) and Left Hand.[5][6]
^ Le Guin mentions other minor nations on the planet, but they do not figure in the action of the novel.
^ In the 1987 poll, The Left Hand of Darkness ranked second to Frank Herbert's Dune (1965).[44] In the 1975 version of the poll covering novels, Left Hand had ranked third behind Dune and Arthur C. Clarke's Childhood's End (1963).[45]


## References
^ Fenner 2014.
^ Bajko, Matthew S (January 26, 2024). "UC Riverside buys Le Guin sci-fi novel cover art". Bay Area Reporter. Retrieved January 26, 2024.
^ Spivack 1984, p. 173.
^ a b c d Watson 1975.
^ Spivack 1984, p. 47.
^ Spivack 1984, p. 166.
^ a b c Spivack 1984, pp. 44–50.
^ Reid 2009, pp. 9, 120.
^ a b c d e f g h i j Bloom 1987.
^ a b c d e f g h i j White 1999, pp. 45–50.
^ a b White 1999, pp. 60–65.
^ Davison-Vecchione, D; Seeger, S (2021). "Ursula Le Guin's Speculative Anthropology: Thick Description, Historicity and Science Fiction". Theory, Culture & Society. 40 (7–8): 119–140. doi:10.1177/02632764211051780. S2CID 243824084.
^ a b c d White 1999, pp. 55–60.
^ a b c White 1999, pp. 70–77.
^ a b White 1999, pp. 51–55.
^ a b Reid 1997, pp. 3–8.
^ a b c Reid 1997, pp. 10–17.
^ a b c d Reid 1997, pp. 49–55.
^ a b c d e Cummins 1990, pp. 66–67.
^ Le Guin 2017.
^ a b c d e Cummins 1990, pp. 68–70.
^ a b Reid 1997, pp. 19–21.
^ a b c d e f g h i j k l Reid 1997, pp. 51–56.
^ a b c d e f Cummins 1990, pp. 74–77.
^ a b c Cummins 1990, pp. 71–74.
^ Le Guin 1980, pp. 33–50.
^ a b Le Guin 1980, p. 10.
^ Le Guin 1980, pp. 19–29.
^ Le Guin 1980, p. 70.
^ Reid 1997, pp. 50–60.
^ Le Guin 1980, p. 47.
^ Le Guin 1980, pp. 86–91.
^ Le Guin 1980, p. 176.
^ Le Guin 1980, pp. 184–204.
^ a b c d Spivack 1984, pp. 48–51.
^ Fayad 1997, p. 71.
^ Le Guin 1980, p. 52.
^ a b Le Guin 1980, p. 69.
^ Le Guin 1980, p. 94.
^ a b Le Guin 1980, p. 201.
^ Le Guin 1980, p. 108.
^ a b Stableford 1995.
^ Locus 2012.
^ a b Locus 1987.
^ Locus 1975.
^ Freeman 2014.
^ Galaxy 1970.
^ Bloom 2014, p. 564.
^ a b Wray 2016.
^ White 1999, p. 5.
^ a b c d e f Cummins 1990, pp. 78–85.
^ Pennington 2000.
^ Le Guin, Ursula K. (1994). The Left Hand of Darkness. USA: Ace. ISBN 0-8027-1302-5.
^ Le Guin 1980, p. 164.
^ a b c d e White 1999, pp. 65–70.
^ Cummins 1990, pp. 84.
^ a b Cummins 1990, pp. 85–87.
^ White 1999, pp. 50–55.
^ White 1999, pp. 56–60.
^ McWhorter 1998.
^ a b c d Cummins 1990, pp. 76–81.
^ Le Guin 1980, p. 1.
^ Slusser 1976, p. 29.
^ Reid 1997, pp. 20–25.
^ Spivack 1984, pp. 44–60.
^ Reid 1997.
^ Harris 2004.
^ Littleton 2017.
^ Hughley 2013.
^ Notario & Stone 2017.
^ Rubin, Caitlin Julia. "Tuesday Smillie: To build another world". Rose Art Museum. Retrieved March 3, 2019.
^ MacLaughlin, Nina (October 19, 2018). "Painter takes inspiration from Le Guin; Carle museum highlights King award winners". The Boston Globe. Retrieved March 3, 2019.
^ BBC Radio 4 2015a.
^ BBC Radio 4 2015b.
^ Open Culture 2015.


## Sources
"Ursula Le Guin's The Left Hand Of Darkness". BBC Radio 4. BBC. Retrieved March 27, 2015.
"Ursula K. Le Guin on Radio 4 and 4 Extra". BBC Radio 4. BBC. April 8, 2015. Retrieved May 5, 2015.
Bloom, Harold (2014). The Western Canon. Boston, Massachusetts, USA: Houghton Mifflin Harcourt. ISBN 978-0-547-54648-3.
Bloom, Harold (1987). "Introduction". In Bloom, Harold (ed.). Modern Critical Interpretations: Ursula Le Guin's The Left Hand of Darkness. New York, New York, USA: Chelsea House Publications. pp. 1–10. ISBN 978-1-55546-064-8.
Cummins, Elizabeth (1990). Understanding Ursula K. Le Guin. Columbia, South Carolina, USA: University of South Carolina Press. ISBN 978-0-87249-687-3.
Fenner, Arnie (November 25, 2014). "The Artist: Leo and Diane Dillon". Tor.com.
Fayad, Mona (1997). "Aliens, Androgynes, and Anthropology: Le Guin's Critique of Representation in "The Left Hand of Darkness"". Mosaic: An Interdisciplinary Critical Journal. 30 (3). University of Manitoba: 59–73. ISSN 0027-1276. JSTOR 44029822.
Freeman, John (November 22, 2014). "Ursula Le Guin: She Got There First". The Boston Globe.
"Galaxy Bookshelf". Galaxy Science Fiction: 144–58. February 1970.
Harris, Dana (December 12, 2004). "Phobos Will Embrace 'Darkness': Shingle Planning Pic, Vidgame Based on Le Guin Tome". Variety.com. Retrieved March 27, 2015.
Hughley, Marty (May 5, 2013). "Theater Review: 'The Left Hand of Darkness' Finds Deeply Human Love on a Cold, Blue World". The Oregonian. Retrieved November 1, 2013.
Le Guin, Ursula K. (1980). The Left Hand of Darkness. New York, New York, USA: Harper & Row. ISBN 978-0-06-012574-5.
Le Guin, Ursula K. (2017). Attebery, Brian (ed.). Introduction. The Hainish Novels and Stories. Vol. One. Library of America. ISBN 978-1-59853-537-2.
Littleton, Cynthia (May 11, 2017). "Critical Content Developing Ursula K. Le Guin's 'Left Hand of Darkness' as Limited Series". Variety. Archived from the original on May 16, 2017.
"Locus Poll Best All-time Novel Results". Locus Online. 1975. Archived from the original on May 1, 2015.
"Locus Poll Best All-time Novel Results: 1987, sf novels". Locus. August 1987. Archived from the original on May 20, 2015. Retrieved April 12, 2012.
"Ursula K. Le Guin". The Locus Index to SF Awards: Index of Literary Nominees. Archived from the original on September 12, 2015. Retrieved April 12, 2012.
McWhorter, Carrie B. (1998). "Brandishing Shifgrethor: Le Guin's The Left Hand of Darkness". Notes on Contemporary Literature. 28: 11–12.
Notario, Laurie; Stone, Jason (October 27, 2017). "From Darkness Into Stage Light". University of Oregon. Archived from the original on November 4, 2017.
"Hear Ursula K. Le Guin's Pioneering Sci-Fi Novel, The Left Hand of Darkness, as a BBC Radio Play". Open Culture.com. Retrieved May 18, 2015.
Pennington, John (2000). "Exorcising Gender: Resisting Readers in Ursula K. Le Guin's Left Hand of Darkness". Extrapolation. 41 (4): 351–358. doi:10.3828/extr.2000.41.4.351.
Reid, Robin Anne, ed. (2009). Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy. Westport, Connecticut, USA: Greenwood Press. ISBN 978-0-313-33589-1.
Reid, Suzanne Elizabeth (1997). Presenting Ursula Le Guin. New York, New York, USA: Twayne. ISBN 978-0-8057-4609-9.
Slusser, George Edgar (1976). The Farthest Shores of Ursula K. Le Guin. San Bernardino: Borgo Press. ISBN 0893702056.
Spivack, Charlotte (1984). Ursula K. Le Guin (1st ed.). Boston, Massachusetts, USA: Twayne Publishers. ISBN 978-0-8057-7393-4.
Stableford, Brian (1995). "Le Guin, Ursula K.: The Left Hand of Darkness". In Barron, Neil (ed.). Anatomy of Wonder 4. New Providence, New Jersey: R.R. Bowker. p. 300. ISBN 978-0-8352-3288-3.
Watson, Ian (March 1975). "Le Guin's Lathe of Heaven and the Role of Dick: The False Reality as Mediator". Science Fiction Studies: 67–75.
White, Donna R. (1999). Dancing with Dragons: Ursula K. Le Guin and the Critics. Columbia, South Carolina, USA: Camden house. ISBN 978-1-57113-034-1.
Wray, John. "Ursula K. Le Guin, The Art of Fiction No. 221". The Paris Review. Retrieved July 8, 2016.


## Further reading
Bernardo, Susan M.; Murphy, Graham J. (2006). Ursula K. Le Guin: A Critical Companion (1st ed.). Westport, Connecticut: Greenwood Press. ISBN 978-0-313-33225-8.
Cadden, Mike (2005). Ursula K. Le Guin Beyond Genre: Fiction for Children and Adults (1st ed.). New York: Routledge. ISBN 978-0-415-99527-6.
Le Guin, Ursula K. (1993). The Language of the Night: Essays on Fantasy and Science Fiction (revised ed.). HarperPerennial. ISBN 978-0-06-092412-6.


## External links
Bibliography: The Left Hand of Darkness at the Internet Speculative Fiction Database
Author's introduction to The Left Hand of Darkness (Archived January 3, 2022, at the Wayback Machine)
Audio review and discussion of The Left Hand of Darkness at The Science Fiction Book Review Podcast
v
t
e
A Wizard of Earthsea (1968)
The Tombs of Atuan (1971)
The Farthest Shore (1972)
Tehanu (1990)
The Other Wind (2001)
"The Word of Unbinding" (1964)
"The Rule of Names" (1964)
"Firelight" (2018)
Tales from Earthsea (2001)
The Books of Earthsea (2018)
Earthsea (miniseries) (2004)
Tales from Earthsea (film) (2006)
Universe
Characters Ged
Ged
Earthsea Revisioned (1993)
Rocannon's World (1966)
Planet of Exile (1966)
City of Illusions (1967)
The Left Hand of Darkness (1969)
The Dispossessed (1974)
The Word for World Is Forest (1976)
Four Ways to Forgiveness (1995)
The Telling (2000)
"The Dowry of Angyar" (1964)
"Winter's King" (1969)
"Vaster than Empires and More Slow" (1971)
"The Day Before the Revolution" (1974)
The Shobies' Story (1990)
"The Matter of Seggri" (1994)
"A Man of the People"
"Coming of Age in Karhide" (1995)
"Old Music and the Slave Women" (1999)
Ansible
Gifts (2004)
Voices (2006)
Powers (2007)
The Lathe of Heaven (1971)
Very Far Away from Anywhere Else (1976)
The Eye of the Heron (1978)
Malafrena (1979)
The Beginning Place (1980)
Always Coming Home (1985)
Lavinia (2008)
"The Ones Who Walk Away from Omelas" (1973)
"The Diary of the Rose" (1976)
"The Wife's Story" (1982)
"Paradises Lost" (2002)
The Wind's Twelve Quarters (1975)
Orsinian Tales (1976)
The Compass Rose (1982)
Buffalo Gals and Other Animal Presences (1987)
A Fisherman of the Inland Sea (1994)
Unlocking the Air and Other Stories (1996)
The Birthday of the World (2002)
Changing Planes (2003)
Catwings (series) (1988–1999)
Cat Dreams
The Language of the Night (1979)
Dancing at the Edge of the World (1982)
Steering the Craft (1998)
v
t
e
The Sword in the Stone by T. H. White (1939)
Slan by A. E. van Vogt (1941)
Beyond This Horizon by Anson MacDonald (1943)
Conjure Wife by Fritz Leiber (1944)
Shadow Over Mars by Leigh Brackett (1945)
The Mule by Isaac Asimov (1946)
Farmer in the Sky by Robert A. Heinlein (1951)
Fahrenheit 451 by Ray Bradbury (1954)
The Demolished Man by Alfred Bester (1953)
They'd Rather Be Right (aka: The Forever Machine) by Mark Clifton and Frank Riley (1955)
Double Star by Robert A. Heinlein (1956)
The Big Time by Fritz Leiber (1958)
A Case of Conscience by James Blish (1959)
Starship Troopers by Robert A. Heinlein (1960)
A Canticle for Leibowitz by Walter M. Miller, Jr. (1961)
Stranger in a Strange Land by Robert A. Heinlein (1962)
The Man in the High Castle by Philip K. Dick (1963)
Here Gather the Stars (aka: Way Station) by Clifford D. Simak (1964)
The Wanderer by Fritz Leiber (1965)
Dune by Frank Herbert / ...And Call Me Conrad (aka: This Immortal) by Roger Zelazny (1966)
The Moon Is a Harsh Mistress by Robert A. Heinlein (1967)
Lord of Light by Roger Zelazny (1968)
Stand on Zanzibar by John Brunner (1969)
The Left Hand of Darkness by Ursula K. Le Guin (1970)
Ringworld by Larry Niven (1971)
To Your Scattered Bodies Go by Philip José Farmer (1972)
The Gods Themselves by Isaac Asimov (1973)
Rendezvous with Rama by Arthur C. Clarke (1974)
The Dispossessed by Ursula K. Le Guin (1975)
The Forever War by Joe Haldeman (1976)
Where Late the Sweet Birds Sang by Kate Wilhelm (1977)
Gateway by Frederik Pohl (1978)
Dreamsnake by Vonda N. McIntyre (1979)
The Fountains of Paradise by Arthur C. Clarke (1980)
The Snow Queen by Joan D. Vinge (1981)
Downbelow Station by C. J. Cherryh (1982)
Foundation's Edge by Isaac Asimov (1983)
Startide Rising by David Brin (1984)
Neuromancer by William Gibson (1985)
Ender's Game by Orson Scott Card (1986)
Speaker for the Dead by Orson Scott Card (1987)
The Uplift War by David Brin (1988)
Cyteen by C. J. Cherryh (1989)
Hyperion by Dan Simmons (1990)
The Vor Game by Lois McMaster Bujold (1991)
Barrayar by Lois McMaster Bujold (1992)
A Fire Upon the Deep by Vernor Vinge / Doomsday Book by Connie Willis (1993)
Green Mars by Kim Stanley Robinson (1994)
Mirror Dance by Lois McMaster Bujold (1995)
The Diamond Age by Neal Stephenson (1996)
Blue Mars by Kim Stanley Robinson (1997)
Forever Peace by Joe Haldeman (1998)
To Say Nothing of the Dog by Connie Willis (1999)
A Deepness in the Sky by Vernor Vinge (2000)
Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire by J. K. Rowling (2001)
American Gods by Neil Gaiman (2002)
Hominids by Robert J. Sawyer (2003)
Paladin of Souls by Lois McMaster Bujold (2004)
Jonathan Strange & Mr Norrell by Susanna Clarke (2005)
Spin by Robert Charles Wilson (2006)
Rainbows End by Vernor Vinge (2007)
The Yiddish Policemen's Union by Michael Chabon (2008)
The Graveyard Book by Neil Gaiman (2009)
The Windup Girl by Paolo Bacigalupi / The City & the City by China Miéville (2010)
Blackout/All Clear by Connie Willis (2011)
Among Others by Jo Walton (2012)
Redshirts by John Scalzi (2013)
Ancillary Justice by Ann Leckie (2014)
The Three-Body Problem by Cixin Liu, translated by Ken Liu (2015)
The Fifth Season by N. K. Jemisin (2016)
The Obelisk Gate by N. K. Jemisin (2017)
The Stone Sky by N. K. Jemisin (2018)
The Calculating Stars by Mary Robinette Kowal (2019)
A Memory Called Empire by Arkady Martine (2020)
Network Effect by Martha Wells (2021)
A Desolation Called Peace by Arkady Martine (2022)
Nettle & Bone by T. Kingfisher (2023)
Some Desperate Glory by Emily Tesh (2024)
v
t
e
Dune by Frank Herbert (1966)
Babel-17 by Samuel R. Delany / Flowers for Algernon by Daniel Keyes (1967)
The Einstein Intersection by Samuel R. Delany (1968)
Rite of Passage by Alexei Panshin (1969)
The Left Hand of Darkness by Ursula K. Le Guin (1970)
Ringworld by Larry Niven (1971)
A Time of Changes by Robert Silverberg (1972)
The Gods Themselves by Isaac Asimov (1973)
Rendezvous with Rama by Arthur C. Clarke (1974)
The Dispossessed by Ursula K. Le Guin (1975)
The Forever War by Joe Haldeman (1976)
Man Plus by Frederik Pohl (1977)
Gateway by Frederik Pohl (1978)
Dreamsnake by Vonda N. McIntyre (1979)
The Fountains of Paradise by Arthur C. Clarke (1980)
Timescape by Gregory Benford (1981)
The Claw of the Conciliator by Gene Wolfe (1982)
No Enemy But Time by Michael Bishop (1983)
Startide Rising by David Brin (1984)
Neuromancer by William Gibson (1985)
Ender's Game by Orson Scott Card (1986)
Speaker for the Dead by Orson Scott Card (1987)
The Falling Woman by Pat Murphy (1988)
Falling Free by Lois McMaster Bujold (1989)
The Healer's War by Elizabeth Ann Scarborough (1990)
Tehanu: The Last Book of Earthsea by Ursula K. Le Guin (1991)
Stations of the Tide by Michael Swanwick (1992)
Doomsday Book by Connie Willis (1993)
Red Mars by Kim Stanley Robinson (1994)
Moving Mars by Greg Bear (1995)
The Terminal Experiment by Robert J. Sawyer (1996)
Slow River by Nicola Griffith (1997)
The Moon and the Sun by Vonda N. McIntyre (1998)
Forever Peace by Joe Haldeman (1999)
Parable of the Talents by Octavia E. Butler (2000)
Darwin's Radio by Greg Bear (2001)
The Quantum Rose by Catherine Asaro (2002)
American Gods by Neil Gaiman (2003)
Speed of Dark by Elizabeth Moon (2004)
Paladin of Souls by Lois McMaster Bujold (2005)
Camouflage by Joe Haldeman (2006)
Seeker by Jack McDevitt (2007)
The Yiddish Policemen's Union by Michael Chabon (2008)
Powers by Ursula K. Le Guin (2009)
The Windup Girl by Paolo Bacigalupi (2010)
Blackout/All Clear by Connie Willis (2011)
Among Others by Jo Walton (2012)
2312 by Kim Stanley Robinson (2013)
Ancillary Justice by Ann Leckie (2014)
Annihilation by Jeff VanderMeer (2015)
Uprooted by Naomi Novik (2016)
All the Birds in the Sky by Charlie Jane Anders (2017)
The Stone Sky by N. K. Jemisin (2018)
The Calculating Stars by Mary Robinette Kowal (2019)
A Song for a New Day by Sarah Pinsker (2020)
Network Effect by Martha Wells (2021)
A Master of Djinn by P. Djèlí Clark (2022)
Babel, or the Necessity of Violence by R. F. Kuang (2023)
The Saint of Bright Doors by Vajra Chandrasekera (2024)
Someone You Can Build a Nest In by John Wiswell (2025)
v
t
e
Motherlines and Walk to the End of the World by Suzy McKee Charnas
The Left Hand of Darkness by Ursula K. Le Guin
The Female Man and "When It Changed" by Joanna Russ
A Woman of the Iron People by Eleanor Arnason (1991, tie)
White Queen by Gwyneth Jones (1991, tie)
China Mountain Zhang by Maureen F. McHugh (1992)
Ammonite by Nicola Griffith (1993)
"The Matter of Seggri" by Ursula K. Le Guin (1994, tie)
Larque on the Wing by Nancy Springer (1994, tie)
Waking the Moon by Elizabeth Hand (1995, tie)
The Memoirs Of Elizabeth Frankenstein by Theodore Roszak (1995, tie)
"Mountain Ways" by Ursula K. Le Guin (1996, tie)
The Sparrow by Mary Doria Russell (1996, tie)
Black Wine by Candas Jane Dorsey (1997, tie)
"Travels With The Snow Queen" by Kelly Link (1997, tie)
"Congenital Agenesis of Gender Ideation" by Raphael Carter (1998)
The Conqueror's Child by Suzy McKee Charnas (1999)
Wild Life by Molly Gloss (2000)
The Kappa Child by Hiromi Goto (2001)
Light by M. John Harrison (2002, tie)
"Stories for Men" by John Kessel (2002, tie)
Set This House in Order: A Romance of Souls by Matt Ruff (2003)
Camouflage by Joe Haldeman (2004, tie)
Not Before Sundown by Johanna Sinisalo (2004, tie)
Air by Geoff Ryman (2005)
The Orphan's Tales: In the Night Garden by Catherynne M. Valente (2006, tie)
Half Life by Shelley Jackson (2006, tie)
James Tiptree Jr.: The Double Life of Alice B. Sheldon by Julie Phillips (2006, special recognition)
The Carhullan Army by Sarah Hall (2007)
The Knife of Never Letting Go by Patrick Ness (2008, tie)
Filter House by Nisi Shawl (2008, tie)
Cloud and Ashes: Three Winter’s Tales by Greer Gilman (2009, tie)
Ōoku: The Inner Chambers by Fumi Yoshinaga (2009, tie)
Baba Yaga Laid an Egg by Dubravka Ugrešić (2010)
Redwood and Wildfire by Andrea Hairston (2011)
The Drowning Girl by Caitlín R. Kiernan (2012, tie)
Ancient, Ancient by Kiini Ibura Salaam (2012, tie)
Rupetta by N. A. Sulway (2013)
The Girl in the Road by Monica Byrne (2014, tie)
My Real Children by Jo Walton (2014, tie)
"The New Mother" by Eugene Fischer (2015, tie)
Lizard Radio by Pat Schmatz (2015, tie)
When the Moon Was Ours by Anna-Marie McLemore (2016)
Who Runs the World? by Virginia Bergin (2017)
"They Will Dream in the Garden" by Gabriela Damián Miravete (2018)
Freshwater by Akwaeke Emezi (2019)
Ife-Iyoku, the Tale of Imadeyunuagbon by Oghenechovwe Donald Ekpeki (2020)
Light from Uncommon Stars by Ryka Aoki (2021, tie)
Sorrowland by Rivers Solomon (2021, tie)
v
t
e
Christine de Pizan (1364–1430)
Margaret Cavendish (1623–1673)
Marie-Anne Robert (1705–1771)
Mary Griffith (1772–1846)
Mary Shelley (1797–1851)
Jane Wells Webb Loudon (1807–1858)
Annie Denton Cridge (1825–1875)
Rhoda Broughton (1840–1920)
Bertha von Suttner (1843–1914)
Mary E. Bradley Lane (1844–1930)
Elizabeth Burgoyne Corbett (1846–1930)
Auguste Groner (1850–1929)
Renée Marie Gouraud d'Ablancourt (1853–1941)
Irene Clyde (1869–1954)
Charlotte Perkins Gilman (1860–1935)
Inez Haynes Irwin (1873–1970)
Rokeya Sakhawat Hussain (1880–1932)
Rosa Rosà (1884—1978)
Miriam Allen DeFord (1888–1975)
Aurora Bertrana (1892—1974)
Anna Banti (1895—1985)
L. Taylor Hansen (1897–1976)
Karin Boye (1900—1941)
Stella Gibbons (1902–1989)
Leslie F. Stone (1905–1991)
C. L. Moore (1911–1987)
James Tiptree Jr. (1915—1987)
Alice Eleanor Jones (1916–1981)
Shirley Jackson (1916–1965)
Elisabeth Mann-Borgese (1918—2002)
Madeleine L'Engle (1918–2007)
Doris Lessing (1919–2013)
Marlen Haushofer (1920–1970)
Françoise d'Eaubonne (1920–2005)
Carol Emshwiller (1921–2019)
Virginia Kidd (1921—2003)
Judith Merril (1923–1997)
Kate Wilhelm (1928—2018)
Sonya Dorman (1924–2005)
Angélica Gorodischer (1928–2022)
Ursula K. Le Guin (1929–2018)
Sheri S. Tepper (1929—2016)
Sally Miller Gearhart (1931—2021)
Fay Weldon (1931—2023)
Nancy Bogen b. 1932
Sophie Behr (b. 1935)
Marge Piercy (b. 1936)
Joanna Russ (1937–2011)
Margaret Atwood (b. 1939)
Suzy McKee Charnas (1939–2023)
Jutta Heinrich (1940–2021)
Gerd Brantenberg (b. 1941)
Chelsea Quinn Yarbro (b. 1942)
Eleanor Arnason (b. 1942)
Samuel R. Delany (b. 1942)
Donna Haraway (b. 1944)
Rachel Pollack (1945–2023)
Elizabeth A. Lynn (b. 1946)
Octavia E. Butler (1947–2006)
Joëlle Wintrebert (b. 1949)
Lois McMaster Bujold (b. 1949 )
Dubravka Ugrešić (b. 1949)
Roz Kaveney (b. 1949)
Karen Joy Fowler (b. 1950)
L. Timmel Duchamp (b. 1950)
Charlotte Kerner (b. 1950)
Leigh Kennedy (b. 1951)
Stéphanie Nicot (b. 1952)
Marleen S. Barr (b. 1953)
Pat Murphy (b. 1955)
Ellen Kushner (b. 1955)
Montse Watkins (1955–2000)
Joan Slonczewski (b. 1956)
Mary Gentle (b. 1956)
Laura J. Mixon (b. 1957)
Luce Basseterre [fr] (b. 1957)
Rieko Matsuura (b. 1958)
Ninni Holmqvist (b. 1958)
Mari Kotani (b. 1958)
Ïan Larue (b. 1958)
Nicoletta Vallorani (b. 1958)
Maureen F. McHugh (b. 1959)
Lucie Chenu (b. 1960)
Neil Gaiman (b. 1960)
Melissa Scott (b. 1960)
Nalo Hopkinson (b. 1960)
Nicola Griffith (b. 1960)
Gabriela Bustelo (b. 1962)
Lola Robles (b. 1963)
Hiroe Suga (b. 1963)
Jo Walton (b. 1964)
Heidrun Jänchen (b. 1964)
Tananarive Due (b. 1966)
Catherine Dufour (b. 1966)
Ann Leckie (b. 1966)
Virginia Bergin (b. 1966)
Justine Larbalestier (b. 1967)
Kelly Robson (b. 1967)
Yumiko Shirai (b. 1967)
Sara Doke (b. 1968)
Annalee Newitz (b. 1969)
Charlie Jane Anders (b. 1969)
Lisa Yaszek (b. 1969)
Barbara Kirchner [fr] (b. 1970)
Kelly Sue DeConnick (b. 1970)
Li-Cam (b. 1970)
Fumi Yoshinaga (b. 1971)
N. K. Jemisin (b. 1972)
Sheree R. Thomas (b. 1972)
Naomi Novik (b. 1973)
Kiini Ibura Salaam (b. 1973)
Sabrina Calvo (b. 1974)
Juli Zeh (b. 1974)
Nnedi Okorafor (b. 1974)
Catherynne M. Valente (b. 1979)
Kameron Hurley (b. 1980)
Judith C. Vogt (b. 1981)
Nghi Vo (b. 1981)
Tang Fei (b. 1983)
Amal El-Mohtar (b. 1984)
Hao Jingfang (b. 1984)
Theresa Hannig (b. 1984)
Becky Chambers (b. 1985)
Tamsyn Muir (b. 1985)
Aline Valek (b. 1986)
Akwaeke Emezi (b. 1987)
Nadia Chonville (b. 1989)
Floriane Soulas (b. 1989)
Xiran Jay Zhao (b. 1997)
Benjanun Sriduangkaew (b. ?)
Vandana Singh (b. ?)
The Book of the City of Ladies (1405)
The Blazing World (1666)
The Voyages of Lord Seaton to the Seven Planets (1765)
Frankenstein (1818)
Man's Rights; Or, How Would You Like It? (1870)
Mizora (1880)
New Amazonia: A Foretaste of the Future (1889)
Iola Leroy (1892)
Unveiling a Parallel (1893)
Arqtiq (1899)
NEQUA or The Problem of the Ages (1900)
Sultana's Dream (1905)
Beatrice the Sixteenth (1909)
Moving the Mountain (1911)
Angel Island (1914)
Herland (1915)
"Shambleau" (1933)
"That Only a Mother" (1948)
A Wrinkle in Time (1962)
Memoirs of a Spacewoman (1962)
"When I Was Miss Dow" (1966)
"Aye, and Gomorrah" (1967)
The Left Hand of Darkness (1969)
And Chaos Died (1970)
The Kin of Ata Are Waiting for You (1971)
The Word for World is Forest (1972)
"When It Changed" (1972)
Ten Thousand Light-Years from Home (1973)
"The Women Men Don't See" (1973)
The Dispossessed (1974)
"The Girl Who Was Plugged In" (1974)
The Holdfast Chronicles (1974–1999)
The Female Man (1975)
Woman on the Edge of Time (1976)
Houston, Houston, Do You Read? (1976)
The Female Man (1977)
Egalia's Daughters (1977)
Up the Walls of the World (1978)
The Eye of the Heron (1978)
Star Songs of an Old Primate (1978)
Kindred (1979)
The Marriages Between Zones Three, Four and Five (1980)
The Vampire Tapestry (1980)
"Souls" (1982)
Native Tongue (1984)
The Handmaid's Tale (1985)
Brightness Falls from the Air (1985)
A Door into Ocean (1986)
Golden Days (1987)
Lilith's Brood (1987)
"Rachel in Love" (1987)
The Gate to Women's Country (1988)
Her Smoke Rose Up Forever (1990)
Beauty (1991)
He, She and It (1991)
Chroniques du pays des mères (1992)
"The Matter of Seggri" (1993)
Parable of the Sower (1993)
The Fifth Sacred Thing (1993)
Brown Girl in the Ring (1998)
The Fresco (2000)
Tales from Earthsea (2001)
Ōoku: The Inner Chambers (2004–2020)
Bu Bu Jing Xin (2005)
Fledgling (2005)
Le Goût de l'immortalité (2005)
Choir Boy (2005)
Wombs (2009–2016)
The Hundred Thousand Kingdoms (2010)
Who Fears Death (2010)
Lavinia (2008)
The Alchemy of Stone (2008)
The Method (2009)
"Six Months, Three Days" (2011)
Ancillary Justice (2013)
The Automation (2014)
The Fifth Season (2015)
Binti (2015)
The Obelisk Gate (2016)
All the Birds in the Sky (2018)
This Is How You Lose the Time War (2019)
The Empress of Salt and Fortune (2020)
When the Tiger Came Down the Mountain (2020)
The Future of Another Timeline (2021)
Victories Greater Than Death (2021)
Dreams Bigger Than Heartbreak (2022)
The Memory Librarian: And Other Stories of Dirty Computer (2022)
The Daughter of Doctor Moreau (2022)
Promises Stronger Than Darkness (2023)
Cyborg
Feminist science fiction
Gender in speculative fiction
Single-gender world
Women in speculative fiction
Láadan (1982)
Women of Wonder (1975)
Aurora: Beyond Equality (1976)
The Language of the Night (1979)
More Women of Wonder (1979)
How to Suppress Women's Writing (1983)
"A Cyborg Manifesto" (1984)
To Write Like a Woman (1995)
"We Have Always Fought" (2013)
The Geek Feminist Revolution (2016)
Dark Matter: A Century of Speculative Fiction from the African Diaspora (2000)
L'Oiselle (1909)
Jirel of Joiry (1934)
Aqueduct Press
Launch Point Press
Onlywomen Press
Regal Crest Enterprises
Zubaan Books
Forerunner
The Witch and the Chameleon
Janus
Bitch Planet
Sense of Gender Awards
Otherwise Award
Lambda Literary Award
Wiscon
Sad Puppies (2013–2017)
VIAF
Germany
Israel
MusicBrainz work


URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bug_Jack_Barron
Content:

Bug Jack Barron is a 1969 science fiction novel by American writer Norman Spinrad, first serialized in the New Worlds magazine under the editorship of Michael Moorcock. It was nominated for the 1970 Hugo Award.[1] The novel is notable for its lyrical style and unique use of cut-up phrases. In this regard, Spinrad has cited the influence of Beat writers William S. Burroughs, Allen Ginsberg, and Jack Kerouac.[2][3]


## Plot
The "Bug Jack Barron" talk show begins Wednesday evening with an on-air call from Rufus W. Johnson, who has been refused service by the Foundation for Human Immortality, an organization which allows people to have themselves cryonically frozen. Johnson accuses the Foundation of being unwilling to offer Freezer contracts to African Americans. Show host Jack Barron is appalled to hear this and after making a few calls, finds a supporter in the Governor of Mississippi, Lukas Greene.
The following day, Barron receives a visit from Foundation Chair Benedict Howards, who tries to gain Barron's support by offering him a free Freezer Contract and immortal life. Though tempted, Barron refuses the bribe. Howards later makes the same offer to Barron's ex-wife Sara. Sara dreams about being frozen together with Jack, and being revived together after an immortality treatment has been discovered.
The next morning, the Governor of California, Gregory Morris, suggests that Barron consider running as the next President of the United States. Though Barron is reluctant, his friend Lukas Greene (who is black and of radical political views) encourages Barron to accept. Barron then gets a call from Sara. The two argue about why they broke up and soon reconcile. Howards visits Barron again with new contracts for both Jack and Sara to sign. The new contracts not only guarantee being frozen, but also the immortality treatment. Jack cannot see any drawback in the contract, and he and Sara agree to sign.
On the next broadcast of “Bug Jack Barron”, a man named Henry George Franklin calls in and complains that he sold his young daughter to some wealthy men for $50,000. Even though the men promised to provide his daughter with a better life, Henry claims he was duped, and wants Barron to help him get his daughter back. Howards is furious that Franklin was on the show, and tells Barron to abandon the story. Intrigued by Howards's reaction, Barron flies to Evers, Mississippi to meet Franklin and speak with him. They meet in a restaurant in a low-income neighborhood and start by walking to the governor's mansion, when a sniper kills Franklin and attempts to shoot Barron as well. Barron deduces that Benedict Howards must have been behind the shooting and realizes in turn that the Foundation must also be responsible for buying Franklin's daughter. Barron later confirms his suspicion by using computer records to search for other children who are now missing.
Upon his return home, Barron shares all his suspicions with Sara. To get to the bottom of the mystery, Barron unveils a plan. He and Sara will receive their immortality treatment, and make Howards think he really has them trapped. Then when Howards admits to all his crimes, Jack will use a concealed very small portable telephone to record the confession. Sara agrees. The next day, they go to Howards's office and proceed with the treatment. When the treatment is over, Howards explains that the treatment consists of transplanting glands from the abducted children into new bodies. The children are killed off by radiation poisoning. Howards threatens if Barron exposes Howards, Howards will suborn witnesses to testify that Barron and Sara knew everything about the treatment, meaning that he and Sara will also be charged with murder.
Barron and Sara return home where he reveals to her the truth about the children and that he will support the Foundation in his next shows. When he goes to the show, he gets a call from Sara, who commits suicide in order to change his mind. With nothing left to lose, Barron reveals the truth during the show, while Howards goes paranoid on air, threatening to kill him. Barron begs the viewers to believe that he didn't know anything about the children beforehand.
Eventually, Barron does run for President, planning to give his position to future Vice-President Lukas Greene after his election.


## Reception
The book was serialised in the British New Wave science fiction magazine New Worlds during Michael Moorcock's editorship. Its explicit language and cynical attitude toward politicians, as well as the fact that the magazine was partially funded by the Arts Council of Great Britain, angered British Members of Parliament.[4] Jennie Lee, then Minister of State for the Arts, defended the Arts Council's funding of the magazine without referring to the serialisation specifically.[5] Later, it was banned[clarification needed] by W. H. Smith, a major British chain of bookstores.[6]
Algis Budrys gave the novel a mixed review, describing it as "a good book, an excellent idea and fair piece of writing." Budrys faulted the central science-fictional device as "absolute nonsense," saying that Spinrad "did not care enough about credibility to even be graceful," and noted that "Spinrad often uses representations of things, rather than the things themselves, and this doesn't always work." Still, he concluded, the book "is a flawed but acceptable telling of a magnificent story, a representation of nobility, one might say, with a Mickey Mouse ending."[7] Joanna Russ, however, found the book to be "a bad book [where] the author is not in control of his material, but is in the process of being smothered by it." She faulted Spinrad's writing style ("Everybody talks like everybody else"), his plotting ("a novel of political intrigue ought to have an intelligible intrigue in it"), and characterization (the main antagonist is "only a villain-shaped hole crammed with super-high-gear prose"), concluding that the book was a "romantic, half-innocent, youthfully bouncy, exasperatingly schlocky and ultimately silly book."[8]
In 1992, The New York Times noted that in Jack Barron, "Norman Spinrad created the talk-show host as powerful public-opinion maker."[9]


## Adaptations
In 1983, author Harlan Ellison was hired to write a screenplay for a film to be directed by Costa-Gavras for Universal Pictures. After the project went nowhere, Ellison published this screenplay, titled "None of the Above," including casting suggestions that had Martin Sheen as Jack Barron and Sigourney Weaver as Sara.[10][11]


## See also
Novels portal
Sex and sexuality in speculative fiction


## References
^ "1970 Award Winners & Nominees". Worlds Without End. Retrieved July 29, 2009.
^ "SFF Beats". SFF Net. Archived from the original on September 10, 2012. Retrieved August 10, 2010.
^ Norman Spinrad, Science Fiction in the Real World. (Carbondale, IL: Southern Illinois University Press, 1990) 112 [ISBN missing]
^ Michael Ashley, History of the Science Fiction Magazine, 1950–1970, Volume 2: Transformations. (Liverpool, England: Liverpool University Press, 2005) 250.
^ HANSARD, Volume 764; 'Magazine "New Worlds" (Grants)'
^ John J. Pierce, Odd Genre: A Study in Imagination and Evolution (Westport, CT: Greenwood Press, 1994) 159
^ "Galaxy Bookshelf", Galaxy Science Fiction, August 1969, pp. 149–52
^ "Books", F&SF, January 1970, pp. 38–40
^ Slade, Margot (October 4, 1992). "THE NATION; Ross Perot or Superstoe? Science Fiction Got There First". The New York Times.
^ "None of the Above". HarlanEllisonBooks.com. Retrieved January 20, 2015.]
^ BUG JACK BARRON--screenplay by Norman Spinrad (Kindle ed.). February 19, 2012). February 19, 2012. Retrieved January 20, 2015.]


## External links
Bug Jack Barron title listing at the Internet Speculative Fiction Database
Norman Spinrad's official website
Norman Spinrad's blog
1999 Locus Magazine interview
SFF Beats at SFF Net
Official ebook edition including video commercial for Acapulco Golds


URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tau_Zero
Content:

Tau Zero is a hard science fiction novel by American writer Poul Anderson. The novel was based upon the short story "To Outlive Eternity" appearing in Galaxy Science Fiction in 1967. It was first published in book form in 1970. The book is a quintessential example of "hard sci-fi", as its plot is dominated by futuristic technology grounded in real physics principles. It was nominated for the Hugo Award for Best Novel in 1971.[2]


## Plot
Tau Zero follows the crew of the starship Leonora Christine, a colonization vessel crewed by 25 men and 25 women aiming to reach the nearby star Beta Virginis. The ship is powered by a Bussard ramjet. This mode of propulsion is not capable of faster-than-light travel, and so the voyage is subject to relativity and time dilation: the crew will spend 5 years on board, whereas 33 years will pass on the Earth before they arrive at their destination. The ship accelerates at a modest constant rate for most of the first half of the journey, eventually achieving an appreciable percentage of the speed of light, and the goal is to decelerate at the same rate during the second half of the journey by reversing the ram scoop fields. However, the Leonora Christine passes through a small nebula before the half-way point, damaging the deceleration field generators. Since the Bussard engines must be kept running to provide particle/radiation shielding, and because of the hard radiation produced by the engines, the crew can neither repair the damage nor turn off their ramjet.
The text consists of narrative prose interspersed with paragraphs in which Anderson explains the scientific basis of relativity, time dilation, the ship's mechanics and details of the cosmos outside.
As there is no hope of completing the original mission, the crew increase acceleration even more; they need to leave the Milky Way altogether in order to reach a region where the local gas density, and the concomitant radiation hazard, are low enough that they can repair the decelerator. The ship's ever-increasing velocity brings the time dilation to extreme levels and takes the crew further and further away from any possibility of contact with humanity. The initial plan is to locate and land on a suitable planet in another galaxy. Millions of years would have passed since their departure, and in any case they would be millions of light years from Earth. However, they find the vacuum of intergalactic space insufficient for safety; they must instead travel to a region between superclusters of galaxies to make repairs. They do, but the extremely thinly spread matter is then too dispersed to use for deceleration. They must wait, flying free but essentially without the ability to change course, until they randomly encounter enough galactic matter to decelerate adequately to search for habitable planets. To make the waiting time shorter, they continue accelerating through the galaxy clusters they encounter, more and more closely approaching the speed of light with tau, or proper time, decreasing closer and closer to zero.
Throughout the story, Charles Reymont, the ship's Constable, fights to keep hope alive in the confined community and at the same time maintain order and discipline, sometimes at great emotional cost to himself. He explains his system to his partner Chi-Yuen Ai-Ling:
The human animal wants a father-mother image but, at the same time, resents being disciplined. You can get stability like this: The ultimate authority source is kept remote, god-like, practically unapproachable. Your immediate superior is a mean son-of-a-bitch who makes you toe the mark and whom you therefore detest. But his own superior is as kind and sympathetic as rank allows ... The end result is that Captain Telander's been isolated. His infallibility doesn't have to cope with essentially unfixable human messes ... I'm the traditional top sergeant. Hard, harsh, demanding, overbearing, inconsiderate, brutal. Not so bad as to start a petition for my removal. But enough to irritate, be disliked, although respected. That's good for the troops. It's healthier to be mad at me than to dwell on personal woes... [First Officer] Lindgren smooths things out. As first officer, she sustains my power. But she overrules me from time to time. She exercises her rank to bend regulations in favor of mercy. Therefore she adds benignity to the attributes of Ultimate Authority.
— Chapter 12
The storyline is similar to that of the long poem and later opera Aniara, in which the ship was unable to stop and doomed to travel endlessly, but Tau Zero has a more upbeat ending. By the time the ship is repaired, tau has decreased to less than a billionth and the crew experience "billion-year cycles which pass as moments". But by the time that they are ready to attempt to find a future home, they realize that the universe is approaching a Big Crunch. (The Big Crunch was a leading theory of the fate of the universe at the time this book was written.) The universe collapses (a process the starship survives because there is still enough uncondensed hydrogen for maneuvering outside the growing singularity) and then explodes in a new Big Bang. The voyagers then decelerate and finally disembark at a planet with a habitat suitably similar to Earth, on which the vegetation has a vivid bluish-green color.


## Prominent characters
Ingrid Lindgren, Ship's First Officer – Swedish; she and Reymont had a relationship until he learned of her liaisons with Boris Federoff; she becomes the "face" of authority and the link between crew and passengers.
Charles Reymont, Ship's Constable – Interplanetarian (i.e. no Earth-country citizenship, by choice), veteran of two previous interstellar flights; determined to maintain order and ensure survival in the face of disaster and hopelessness, he becomes the ship's de facto leader (although he defers to the ship's hierarchy).
Boris Fedoroff, Ship's Chief Engineer – Russian
Chi-Yuen Ai-Ling, Planetologist – Chinese; after Reymont's break-up with Ingrid, she and Reymont begin a long-term relationship.
Lars Telander, Ship's Captain – Swedish; a devout Protestant and a strong leader, but the dangers, uncertainties and responsibilities piled on him following the disaster seem to slowly erode him.
Johann Friewald, Machinist – German; a man of courage and good nature; after the disaster, he becomes Reymont's right-hand man in maintaining order and ensuring survival.
Elof Nilsson, Astronomer – Swedish; a brilliant scientist, but arrogant, physically unattractive and completely lacking in social graces to the point where he is unable to maintain relationships with people; his relationship with Sadler quickly self-destructs, but later he and Ingrid begin a partnership.
Jane Sadler, Bio-Technician – Canadian; after a brief relationship at the book's beginning and her failed relationship with Nilsson, she and Friewald become permanent partners.
Emma Glassgold, Molecular Biologist – Nationality not stated, lived most of her life in Israel; apparently (though not specifically stated) a devout Christian; as the story develops, she develops a deep (but non-sexual) relationship with Norbert Williams.
Norbert Williams, Chemist – American; brash and somewhat loud-mouthed and hot-headed, but capable of deep feeling (proved by his relationship with Emma Glassgold).


## Origin of the title
The novel's title is derived from the value of the time contraction factor Tau ( τ {\displaystyle \tau } ), where τ = 1 − v 2 / c 2 {\displaystyle \tau ={\sqrt {1-v^{2}/c^{2}}}} where v is the velocity of the ship and c the speed of light. At a given velocity, the duration that is experienced on the non-accelerating Earth may be multiplied by tau to yield the duration experienced on board the ship. Therefore, as Anderson writes, "the closer that [the ship's velocity] comes to [the speed of light], the closer tau comes to zero", and the longer the time that passes outside the ship for a duration inside. The ship in the story intended to attain a tau of 0.015, but as they continue to accelerate beyond the original schedule, it decreases much further.
This usage of tau is somewhat idiosyncratic. In physics, tau is more usually used to represent the total elapsed time of the moving clock, so Anderson's "tau factor" is what would conventionally be written d τ {\displaystyle \tau } /dt. Physicists also prefer to use gamma (γ) to represent the Lorentz factor in time dilation, which in Anderson's terminology would be 1/ τ {\displaystyle \tau } .[3]


## Themes
The social themes in this book are much lighter than the scientific themes. The latter include everything from black matter, time dilation, the theory of relativity, and Big Crunch theory of the universe.
Reymont, the constable, regularly persists as a hyper-masculinized police officer, while first officer Ingrid basically acts as a buffer between Reymont and Captain Telander. These three characters are responsible for the majority of all decision-making on the ship, but Reymont is the only one who makes regular chapter-to-chapter appearances. In between these interactions, there are numerous romantic entanglements.
In the final, ending parts, much of the novel deals with the crewmembers' reactions to being the last remnants of humanity, and the prospect of being confined with their colleagues indefinitely. Though they were prepared to "lose" twenty Earth years during their journey and spend five on board the ship, the knowledge that they are being carried further and further into the future has various effects on the psychology of the characters. The novel describes the changing and extreme time dilation effects as well as events from the perspective of both the ship and an external observer.
Incidental to the main themes is the political situation on the Earth from which the protagonists set out: a future where the nations of the world entrusted Sweden with overseeing disarmament and found themselves living under the rule of the Swedish Empire. This sub-theme reflects the great interest which Anderson, an American of Danish origin, took in Scandinavian history and culture. In later parts of the book, characters compare their desperate situation to that of semi-mythical characters of Scandinavian legend, with the relevant poetry occasionally quoted. In addition, there is a fist fight between an American astronaut and a Swedish astronaut about who built the best empire, as well as other nationalistic rhetoric.


## See also
Tau Zero Foundation – Successor to the NASA Breakthrough Propulsion Physics Program, named after Tau Zero


## References
^ isfdb
^ "Science Fiction & Fantasy Books by Award: 1971 Award Winners & Nominees". Worlds Without End. Retrieved July 26, 2009.
^ "Why is time slower in rockets?". Sixty Symbols. Archived from the original on December 22, 2021. Retrieved March 16, 2015.


## External links
Tau Zero title listing at the Internet Speculative Fiction Database
Tau Zero at Worlds Without End
Tau Zero at Open Library
v
t
e
Earthman's Burden
Star Prince Charlie
Hoka!
Star Ways
The Snows of Ganymede
Virgin Planet
The Psychotechnic League
Cold Victory
Starship
War of the Wing-Men
Trader to the Stars
The Trouble Twisters
Satan's World
The Earth Book of Stormgate
Mirkheim
The People of the Wind
Ensign Flandry
A Circus of Hells
The Rebel Worlds
The Day of Their Return
Agent of the Terran Empire
Flandry of Terra
A Knight of Ghosts and Shadows
A Stone in Heaven
The Game of Empire
The Long Night
Let the Spacemen Beware
Orbit Unlimited
New America
Maurai and Kith
Orion Shall Rise
Flight to Forever
Vault of the Ages
Brain Wave
Question and Answer
No World of Their Own
The Long Way Home
Perish by the Sword
War of Two Worlds
The Enemy Stars
The High Crusade
Murder in Black Letter
Twilight World
After Doomsday
The Makeshift Rocket
Murder Bound
Shield
Three Worlds to Conquer
The Corridors of Time
The Star Fox
The Fox, the Dog and the Griffin: A Folk Tale Adapted from the Danish of C. Molbeck
World Without Stars
Tau Zero
The Byworlder
The Dancer from Atlantis
There Will Be Time
Fire Time
Inheritors of Earth
The Winter of the World
The Avatar
The Demnon of Scattery
The Devil's Game
The Boat of a Million Years
The Longest Voyage
War of the Gods
Starfarers
Genesis
Mother of Kings
For Love and Glory
Strangers from Earth
Un-Man and Other Novellas
Time and Stars
The Horn of Time
Beyond the Beyond
Seven Conquest
Tales of the Flying Mountains
The Queen of Air and Darkness and Other Stories
The Worlds of Poul Anderson
The Many Worlds of Poul Anderson
Homeward and Beyond
The Best of Poul Anderson
Homebrew
Winners
The Night Face & Other Stories
The Dark Between the Stars
Explorations
Fantasy
Winners
Cold Victory
The Gods Laughed
Starship
The Winter of the World / The Queen of Air and Darkness
Conflict
The Long Night
Past Times
The Unicorn Trade
Dialogue With Darkness
Space Folk
Alight in the Void
The Armies of Elfland
Inconstant Star
Kinship With the Stars
All One Universe
Going for Infinity
Swordsmen from the Stars
Operation Chaos
Operation Luna
Three Hearts and Three Lions
The Broken Sword
Hrolf Kraki's Saga
A Midsummer Tempest
The Merman's Children
Conan the Rebel
War of the Gods
The Golden Slave
Rogue Sword
Mother of Kings
"Brake"
"Call Me Joe"
"Delenda Est"
"Entity"
"Eutopia"
"Goat Song"
"The Light"
"The Longest Voyage"
"The Man Who Came Early"
"Marius"
"Memory"
"Night Piece"
"No Truce with Kings"
"The Pirate"
"The Queen of Air and Darkness"
"Quest"
"Sam Hall"
"The Saturn Game"
"The Sensitive Man"
"The Sharing of Flesh"
"Un-Man"


URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Downward_to_the_Earth
Content:

Downward to the Earth is a 1970 science fiction novel by American writer Robert Silverberg. It is a tale of the quest for transcendence (a frequent Silverberg theme) set on another planet, and includes references to Heart of Darkness, Joseph Conrad's classic tale of colonialism,[1] including the name of Kurtz. Its title references Ecclesiastes 3:21 in the Bible ("Who knows if the spirit of people rises upward and the spirit of animals goes downward to the earth?").
Downward to the Earth was originally published as a four-part serial publication, starting in the November 1969 edition of Galaxy Science Fiction. It was nominated for a Locus Award in 1971.[2]


## Plot summary
Edmund Gunderson was the Terran administrator of the colony world of Belzagor, and he returns to it after it has gained independence, feeling a sense of guilt for the way he has treated its dominant species, the elephant-like Nildoror, whose animalistic appearance had kept Gunderson from taking them seriously as sentient beings. On his return, he feels a new sense of kinship with the natives, perhaps more than for the Terran tourists. The Nildoror undergo a process of rebirth, and Gunderson's greatest guilt comes from having denied rebirth to seven Nildoror to make them help him repair flood damage. He encounters his old colleague Jeff Kurtz (an addict of Naggiar venom), who had undergone the rebirth ceremony only to be turned into something monstrous. Nevertheless, Gunderson dares to subject himself to the rebirth ceremony, which brings him a new understanding of the native creatures and new powers by which he can heal Kurtz and impart his new-found knowledge to others.


## References
^ "The Humanoids Blog, Interview: Robert Silverberg". humanoids.com. Retrieved July 9, 2021.
^ "1971 Award Winners & Nominees". Worlds Without End. Retrieved July 11, 2009.


## External links
Downward to the Earth title listing at the Internet Speculative Fiction Database
Downward to the Earth at Worlds Without End
v
t
e
Bibliography
Revolt on Alpha C
Lest We Forget Thee, Earth
Starman's Quest
Collision Course
The Seed of Earth
The Silent Invaders
Time of the Great Freeze
Conquerors from the Darkness
The Gate of Worlds
Planet of Death
Thorns
Those Who Watch
The Time Hoppers
Hawksbill Station
The Masks of Time
The Man in the Maze
Nightwings
Across a Billion Years
To Live Again
Up the Line
Downward to the Earth
Tower of Glass
Son of Man
The Second Trip
The World Inside
A Time of Changes
The Book of Skulls
Dying Inside
Shadrach in the Furnace
Sailing to Byzantium
Nightfall
The Face of the Waters
Kingdoms of the Wall
The Positronic Man
Starborne
Roma Eterna
The Shrouded Planet
The Dawning Light
Lord Valentine's Castle
Majipoor Chronicles
Valentine Pontifex
Gilgamesh the King
To the Land of the Living
The Cube Root of Uncertainty
Alpha series 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
The Best of Randall Garrett
Dawn of Time
Deep Space: Eight Stories of Science Fiction
Epoch
Far Horizons
Legends
Legends II
The Nebula Awards #18
Nebula Awards Showcase 2001
New Dimensions 1
New Dimensions II
New Dimensions 3
New Dimensions IV
New Dimensions 5
Robert Silverberg Presents the Great SF Stories: 1964
The Science Fiction Hall of Fame, Volume One, 1929–1964
Strange Gifts
Universe 1
Universe 2
Universe 3
Lost Cities and Vanished Civilizations

This article about a 1970s science fiction novel is a stub. You can help Wikipedia by expanding it.
See guidelines for writing about novels. Further suggestions might be found on the article's talk page.
v
t
e


URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Year_of_the_Quiet_Sun
Content:

The Year of the Quiet Sun is a 1970 science fiction novel by American writer Wilson Tucker, dealing with the use of forward time travel to ascertain future political and social events. It won a retrospective John W. Campbell Memorial Award in 1976. It was also nominated for a Nebula Award for Best Novel in 1970, and a Hugo Award for Best Novel in 1971.


## Plot summary
In the summer of 1978, Brian Chaney, a demographer and biblical scholar, is approached by a woman named Kathryn van Hise. Initially assuming her to be a reporter interested in a controversial book he just published on the Dead Sea Scrolls, she informs him that she works for the federal Bureau of Standards and that she is recruiting him for a physical survey of the future via a secretly constructed "TDV" or time displacement vehicle. When Chaney demurs, she informs him that his contract has been purchased from the think tank where he works, leaving him little choice.
The reluctant Chaney travels to a military installation south of Joliet, Illinois. There he is teamed with two diversely talented military officers, United States Air Force Major William Moresby and United States Navy Lieutenant Commander Arthur Saltus. Chaney soon finds that he shares with Saltus an attraction to Kathryn, who is their civilian liaison, but unlike Saltus, Chaney lacks the assertiveness to pursue her aggressively. Instead he focuses his attention on the project, which is soon ordered by the President of the United States to embark on their first mission, a trip two years into the future to discover whether he wins the 1980 presidential election.
The three travel to the Thursday after the election on individual trips, with first Moresby and then Saltus going first according to military seniority. Chaney, as a civilian, is the last to leave, but arrives earlier than the others due to a temporal navigation instrument error. They discover that the president, whom Chaney despises as a weak man (in fact, his name is given as "President Meeks"), wins the election in a landslide as a result of his successful handling of ongoing race riots in Chicago, and that these riots have resulted in the building of a wall down the middle of Cermak Road dividing the north of the city from the south. They also learn that the nation is under martial law after a failed attempt by the Joint Chiefs of Staff to take over the government by coup d'état, one thwarted because of the advance knowledge the time travelers will bring back of it. While preparing for their return, Saltus informs Chaney of an additional discovery: a marriage license between him and Kathryn. Chaney concedes to the gloating Saltus.
With the success of the initial mission, the three are authorized to travel further into the future. They plan to travel to dates of their own choosing within the coming two decades, with each trip to be separated by approximately a year in order to provide broader coverage.
Moresby goes first and travels to July 4, 1999 ("It has significance, after all!" he says), only to emerge in the middle of a racial civil war in which Chicago had recently been attacked with a nuclear bomb launched from China on behalf of black guerrillas. Quickly getting involved in a battle between base troops and invading "ramjets", as the black guerrillas are called, Moresby dies in an attack on a ramjet mortar position.
Saltus is the next to go, traveling to the date of his 50th birthday in 2000. Upon arrival, he discovers remnants of the battle, and is nearly killed by survivors hiding out on the base. Wounded, he is assisted back to the displacement vehicle by an unknown figure and returns to the present, taking with him a tape-recorded report that Moresby had made upon his arrival.
Forewarned by Saltus's experience, Chaney travels further into the future. Not having chosen a date, and disillusioned by his experiences on the 1980 trip, he arrives at an indeterminate point in "2000-plus", by which time the power from the base's nuclear reactor has been disrupted, causing the chronometers set up for the travelers to shut down. Venturing outside, he finds the base to be long-neglected, apart from a cistern and a grave. While further investigating the grave (that of Saltus), he is approached by a young man and a woman who identify themselves as Arthur and Kathryn's children. They take Chaney to Kathryn, now elderly, who reveals that civilization collapsed as an indirect result of the time travel project; with the information from the future, the president made a series of disastrous decisions that led to war with China, followed by the civil war and societal destruction. When Chaney asks how much of this information he reports, she informs him that he reported none of it, that with the loss of power the time displacement vehicle can no longer return to the past and that Chaney is trapped in the future.
Although it is foreshadowed earlier in the book, only at this point is the reader explicitly told a fact that makes Chaney's predicament all the more tragic. He is black, the only such member of the project. "Everyone fears you; no one will trust you since the rebellion," Kathryn tells him. "I am the only one here who does not fear a black man."


## Reception
In her introduction to the 1979 Gregg Press edition of the novel, writer Sandra Miesel praised the novel as "an intimate drama of Armageddon played out within the boundaries of Will County, Illinois by a cast of five principals." She noted the way Wilson linked the America of the novel and the Qumran community of ancient Palestine, which are introduced through Chaney's background as a biblical scholar who had published a book on the Dead Sea scrolls prior to the start of the novel. The parallels were made explicit through Biblical motifs that appear throughout the novel, with characters paralleling types out of the Dead Sea scrolls and such apocalyptic imagery as a radioactive Lake Michigan substituting for the lake of fire in the Book of Revelation.[1]


## References
^ Sandra Miesel, "Introduction", in Wilson Tucker, The Year of the Quiet Sun (Boston: Gregg Press, 1979), pgs. v, xi-xiv.


## External links
The Year of the Quiet Sun title listing at the Internet Speculative Fiction Database
VIAF


URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/334_(novel)
Content:

334 is a 1972 dystopian science fiction novel by American writer Thomas M. Disch. It is set in New York City in the year 2025, depicting a future marked by limited technological advancements, overpopulation, and stark class divisions. The title alludes to the address of the housing project where most of the characters reside, 334 East 11th Street, as well to the year 334 AD in the historical context of the decline of the Roman Empire; numerous comparisons are made between the decline of Rome and the future of the United States.
The dust cover design for the first edition was by Michael Hasted.


## Plot summary
The future in 334 has brought few technological advances except for new medical techniques and recreational drugs. There have been no dramatic disasters, but overpopulation has made housing and other resources scarce; the response is a program of compulsory birth control and eugenics. A welfare state provides for basic needs through an all-encompassing agency called MODICUM, but there is an extreme class division between welfare recipients and professionals.
The novel consists of five independent novellas (previously published separately) with a common setting but different characters, and a longer sub-novel called "334" whose many short sections trace the members of a single family forward and backward in time. The sections are as follows:
"The Death of Socrates": A high-school student finds that, due to poor scores on his Regents Examinations and his father's health history, he has been permanently forbidden to have children; he searches for ways to get extra credit.
"Bodies": Porters at Bellevue Hospital moonlight as body-snatchers catering to a necrophiliac brothel. Their task is complicated by the desire of some patients to be cryonically preserved for a better future.
"Everyday Life in the Later Roman Empire": A privileged government worker, trying to decide where to send her son to school, pursues a parallel existence in a hallucinogen-assisted role-playing game set in the year 334.
"Emancipation: A Romance of the Times to Come": A young professional man and woman face marital conflicts and parenthood, with several twists unique to the 2020s.
"Angouleme": A group of highly educated prepubescent children decides to commit a gratuitous murder in Battery Park.
"334": Vignettes of the Hanson family from 2021 to 2025.


## Characters
Mrs. Hanson: An elderly widow living at 334. Mother to Lottie, Shrimp, and Boz.
Lottie Hanson: An unemployed single mother living at 334.
Shrimp Hanson: Considered genetically desirable for her unusual intelligence, therefore has a free pass from the government to have children, although she is actually motivated by a fetish for artificial insemination.
Boz Hanson: Unemployed, former resident of 334, managed to leave by marrying Milly.
Milly Holt: A professional sex demonstrator for the high schools. Was Birdie's girlfriend, now married to Boz.
Ab Holt: Manages the morgue at Bellevue Hospital. Milly's father.
Birdie Ludd: A high-school student living as a "temp" in a stairwell of 334.
Frances Schaap: A prostitute living at 334. Like many people in the 2020s, she has lupus.
Alexa Miller: A MODICUM administrator, responsible for the Hansons.
Tancred Miller: Alexa's son.
Amparo Martinez: Lottie's daughter.
Bill Harper, aka Little Mister Kissy Lips: Son of a television executive, classmate of Tancred and Amparo.


## Critical reception
334 was selected by David Pringle as one of the 100 best science-fiction novels written since World War II.[citation needed]
Samuel R. Delany's The American Shore (1978) is a book-length critical essay on the novella "Angouleme"; Delany argues that despite the lack of any scientific themes in "Angouleme", its speculative setting makes it inherently science fiction.[1]
The novel was nominated for a 1974 Nebula Award. Previously, the novella "334" won a Locus Poll Award in 1973.[citation needed]


## Release details
Original publication of novellas: "The Death of Socrates": as "Problems of Creativeness", in The Magazine of Fantasy & Science Fiction, April 1967 "Bodies": in Quark/ #4, 1971 "Everyday Life in the Later Roman Empire": in Bad Moon Rising, 1973. "Emancipation": in New Dimensions #1, 1971 "Angouleme": in New Worlds, 1971 "334": in New Worlds, 1972
"The Death of Socrates": as "Problems of Creativeness", in The Magazine of Fantasy & Science Fiction, April 1967
"Bodies": in Quark/ #4, 1971
"Everyday Life in the Later Roman Empire": in Bad Moon Rising, 1973.
"Emancipation": in New Dimensions #1, 1971
"Angouleme": in New Worlds, 1971
"334": in New Worlds, 1972
1972, UK, MacGibbon & Kee, ISBN 0-261-63283-3, hardcover
1974, US, Avon Books, paperback
1974, UK, Sphere, paperback
1976, US, Gregg Press, hardcover
1981, Australia, Magnum, paperback
1987, US, Carroll & Graf, paperback
1999, US, Vintage Books/Random House, ISBN 0-375-70544-9, trade paperback


## See also
Roman Decadence
Stand on Zanzibar - 1968 novel by John Brunner involving similar caste-basted societal decay


## References
^ Delany 1978.
Works cited
Delany, Samuel R. (1978). The American Shore: Meditations on a Tale of Science-Fiction by Thomas M. Disch. Dragon Press. ISBN 0-911499-01-6.


## External links
334 title listing at the Internet Speculative Fiction Database
334 annotations at Nitbar


URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Fifth_Head_of_Cerberus
Content:

The Fifth Head of Cerberus is the title of both a novella and a single-volume collection of three novellas, written by American science fiction and fantasy author Gene Wolfe, both published in 1972. The novella was included in the anthology Nebula Award Stories Eight.


## Title
The title of this collection of novellas is a play on words which refers to Cerberus, a three-headed dog from Greek mythology, which guarded the gate to the Greek underworld, Hades. In the first novella the protagonist explains that Cerberus represents his own family, its three heads being his father, aunt and Mr. Million, adding that its "unseen" heads are his brother David as fourth and, by implication, the fifth and final the narrator's own. Following this logic, the title of the novella therefore refers to the narrator himself, whose story we read. Further parallels between the narrator's family and the mythology of Cerberus can be drawn in numerous other ways throughout this novella. For example, a statue of this mythological creature exists at the front, or "gates" of their family home, which is itself located at 666 Saltimbanque, this number having associations with the underworld dating back to the Greek manuscripts of the Book of Revelation. Also, their family home is later referred to at one point as the Maison du Chien, literally "House of the Dog"; in several other places it is called "Cave Canem", or "Beware of the Dog".


## Single-volume collection
The collection is an expansion of the first novella, originally published in the Orbit 10 anthology edited by Damon Knight in 1972.[1] The following novellas, "A Story" by John V. Marsch and V.R.T. expand on the plot and themes of the first.
These works are set on two colony worlds, 20 light-years from Earth, the double planets of Sainte Anne and Sainte Croix, originally settled by French-speaking colonists, but lost by them in a war with an unnamed enemy. Sainte Anne was (perhaps) once home to an indigenous aboriginal culture (at an apparently pre-paleolithic level of technology) of shapeshifters, who may – or may not – have been wiped out by the human incomers.
Wolfe presented the title novella at a Milford Writer's Workshop. Norbert Slepyan, an editor at Scribner's, was impressed by the story and proposed that Wolfe write two more, related novellas, to be published in a single book.[2]


## Novellas


### The Fifth Head of Cerberus
The title story is in the form of a biographical study, the narrator of which looks back on his boyhood and youth on the planet of Sainte Croix, and the events which led to his long, harsh incarceration, and eventual freedom.
Brought up in relative comfort in a large house (a brothel run by his father and aunt, staffed by several genetically enhanced "demimondaines"), he and his younger brother David are privately tutored by a robotic servant and often go outside the house for short trips.
One evening his old life ends when he is called to attend to his father, a distant figure. He is told that his name is now "Number 5", and after a period of questioning he is given a barrage of psychological, visual, drug, and association tests, which endure for some time. Finally released, he feels very drained. He finds out that David has been treated similarly; both boys undergo this treatment regularly for years afterward, though Number 5 is treated more severely, and begins to experience painful headaches and memory lapses.
He meets his aunt for the first time, who seems to know about Veil's Hypothesis (the theory that the Sainte Anne aboriginals could mimic the human settlers so perfectly that they killed them and took their places) and is given light duties in the running of the family business. He also meets John Marsch, an anthropologist from Earth, when he visits the house. He is visiting Aubrey Veil, author of the hypothesis, who happens to be Number 5's aunt.
Befriending a girl, she, he, and David get involved in amateur dramatics; money being short, they decide to break into a slave trader's warehouse to steal some cash. There, they meet a surgically altered human slave who bears an uncanny resemblance to him, and his father. After it attacks them, they kill it and run away.
Finally sick of his father's ongoing experiments on him, Number 5 decides to kill him. His resolve is bolstered after another visit by Marsch, who casually informs him that he, Number 5, and his father are clones – only two of many. This conversation is ended when Number 5 identifies Marsch as being an aboriginal, based on evidence never specified explicitly in the book. He kills his father, but is discovered and incarcerated. After nine years of imprisonment, Number 5 takes his father's place as head of the family estate.


### "A Story," by John V. Marsch
In this hallucinatory tale from pre-contact Sainte Anne, Sandwalker sets out on a dreamquest to find "the priest", in his lonely cave, to commune with him. Sleeping at the entrance to the cave, he and his twin, Eastwind, unaware of each other's existence, dream of each other. Waking, Sandwalker goes out to hunt, where he meets the Shadow Children, an ethereal, nocturnal race, and they make an alliance by sharing food and learning each other's songs.
Walking on, he meets a girl and a baby, whom he befriends. After sleeping with her, and hunting for more food, he decides to follow the river downstream to the marshes. He manages to rescue some Shadow children from enemy marshmen, whom he kills. Learning that his mother and friends have been captured by other marshmen and taken away, he decides to follow and rescue them as well.
Followed by the Shadow children, they are all, themselves, captured and thrown into a large pit, where he finds his mother and friends; they are all due to be sacrificed by the marshmen, so their souls will enter the river and carry messages from them to the stars. His twin, Eastwind, belongs to the tribe who captured him.
The Shadow Children, whose thoughts, for many years, have spread out into space and protected the world from discovery by alien races (such as they were, originally) decide to relinquish this protection, which attracts a passing starcrosser, and in the excitement of its landing nearby, they escape, and nothing is the same ever again.


### V.R.T.
John Marsch, the anthropologist from the first story, has been imprisoned in a Sainte Croix jail, ostensibly for espionage and assassination. After a few years of captivity, all of it in solitary confinement, Marsch's case is being reviewed by an unnamed security official who must go over the files and determine the next stage in his punishment. These files consist of Marsch's logs from his previous anthropological visit to Sainte Anne, interspersed with taped recordings of his interrogation sessions. The interrogator believes it is obvious that Marsch has never been to Earth, although Marsch is not shown as betraying his origins in the text.
On Sainte Anne to study the mystery of the original inhabitants, Marsch hires a local boy (VRT) from his father, who claims the boy is half-aboriginal. Both the father and the son claim that aboriginals can still be encountered in the deep countryside, so a mission is undertaken to explore.
The two set out into the wilderness. Much time is spent looking for them, but Marsch, despite coming into contact with many examples of Annese wildlife and learning much from the boy (and he from him), never seems to find what he is looking for. Over time, they develop a camp follower, a cat. Marsch suspects at around the same time that the cat joins their company that the boy has been having visitations by a woman.
Later, an accident occurs in which the boy dies. After that, Marsch continues exploring on his own, but he has changed in ways that the alert reader will find suspicious.
On his return to civilization, he visits the brothel run by Number 5's father to interview Dr. Veil. Soon after, he is arrested, tried, and imprisoned for the crimes mentioned, above.
In his memories and dreams, it is revealed that Marsch may in fact be the boy, their identity overlapping. The vital inference of this story is that Veil's hypothesis is indeed correct, the boy assuming Marsch's identity, a wound suffered from the cat being a convenient explanation for the marked decline in hand-writing quality, the native Annese being renowned for their inability to use tools.


## Characters
Number Five: Narrator. It is implied that his last name is "Wolfe", from his mention of searching for his father's writings in the library, and looking among books by Vernor Vinge, Kate Wilhelm, and Virginia Woolf; Kim Stanley Robinson has written of having deduced that "gene" is the ideal "first name for a clone", and of having had this confirmed by Wolfe.[3]
David: Number 5's half-brother. Actually natural son ("an outcrossing") of Maitre.
Mr. Million: A "ten nine (1000000000) unbound simulator"; a robotic body containing the scanned, uploaded brain of a human (Number Five's "great-grandfather", actually the clone-originator). Tutor to him and David.
Maitre: Number 5's "father".
Madame/Aunt Jeannine/Dr. Aubrey Veil: Number 5's "aunt"; actually natural daughter of an earlier clone.
Dr. John V. Marsch: Anthropologist, originally from Earth.
John Sandwalker: Aboriginal on walkabout in a pre-contact Sainte Anne.
John Eastwind: Twin of the above; separated at birth and brought up by a rival tribe.
Trenchard: Human Sainte Annese drunkard, father of VRT.
V.R.T.: Son of Trenchard; half-aboriginal.
The Officer: Sainte Croix security-forces bureaucrat. (Robert Borski identifies the Officer as Number Five's brother David.[4])


## Major themes
The stories touch upon many points of post-colonial theory.
The Maitre character in the first story seems to have a knowledge of the pre-Darwin system called Lamarckism (inheritability of acquired characteristics; an organism can pass on characteristics that it acquired during its lifetime to its offspring).
Twinship; rites of passage; personal freedom; nature versus nurture; theory of mind; place of the individual in society.


## Literary significance and criticism
Gardner Dozois has said that the original story was the best novella of the 1970s.[5]
Dave Pringle reviewed The Fifth Head of Cerberus for Imagine magazine, and stated that "A collection of three inter-related novelettes set in an alien solar system, it makes a deeply imaginative and moving book."[6]


## Awards and nominations
Story: nominated for the 1972 Nebula Award for best novella[citation needed]
Story: nominated for the 1973 Hugo Award for best novella[citation needed]
Story: nominated (3rd) for the 1973 Locus Award for best novella
Story: nominated for the 1999 Locus All-Time Poll for best novella[citation needed]
Novel: nominated (11th) for the 1973 Locus Award for best novel


## Release details
Dec 1972, HB, ISBN 0-684-12830-6, USA edition, Charles Scribner's Sons
Mar 1973, HB, ISBN 0-575-01597-7, UK edition, Gollancz
June 1975, PB, ISBN 0-7043-1176-3, UK edition, Quartet Books
Janu 1983, PB, ISBN 0-09-930030-3, UK edition, Arrow Books
Mar 1994, PB, ISBN 0-312-89020-6, USA edition, Orb Books
Apr 1999, PB, ISBN 1-85798-817-5, UK edition, Gollancz


## Footnotes
^ Orbit, volume 10, at Locus Magazine
^ Larry McCaffery, "On Encompassing the Entire Universe: An Interview with Gene Wolfe"
^ “A Story”, by Kim Stanley Robinson; published in the New York Review of Science Fiction, September 2013; accessed September 18, 2013
^ Borski, Robert: The Long and the Short of It: More Essays on the Fiction of Gene Wolfe, iUniverse 2006
^ Dozois, Gardner: Modern Classics of Science Fiction, St. Martin's Press 1992: introduction to The Fifth Head of Cerberus
^ Pringle, Dave (April 1983). "Book Review". Imagine (review) (1). TSR Hobbies (UK), Ltd.: 16.


## External links
FantasticFiction release information.
Wolfe interview.
The Fifth Head of Cerberus title listing at the Internet Speculative Fiction Database
"The Fifth Head of Cerberus" (novella) title listing at the Internet Speculative Fiction Database
v
t
e
The Shadow of the Torturer (1980)
The Claw of the Conciliator (1981)
The Sword of the Lictor (1981)
The Citadel of the Autarch (1983)
The Urth of the New Sun (1987)
Nightside the Long Sun (1993)
Lake of the Long Sun (1994)
Caldé of the Long Sun (1994)
Exodus from the Long Sun (1996)
On Blue's Waters (1999)
In Green's Jungles (2000)
Return to the Whorl (2001)
Soldier of the Mist (1986)
Soldier of Arete (1989)
Soldier of Sidon (2006)
The Knight (2004)
The Wizard (2004)
Operation Ares (1970)
The Fifth Head of Cerberus (1972)
Peace (1975)
The Devil in a Forest (1976)
Free Live Free (1984)
There Are Doors (1988)
Castleview (1990)
Pandora, By Holly Hollander (1990)
Pirate Freedom (2007)
An Evil Guest (2008)
The Sorcerer's House (2010)
Home Fires (2011)
The Land Across (2013)
A Borrowed Man (2015)
Interlibrary Loan (2020)
The Island of Doctor Death and Other Stories and Other Stories (1980)
Gene Wolfe's Book of Days (1981)
The Wolfe Archipelago (1983)
Plan(e)t Engineering (1984)
Bibliomen (1984)
Storeys from the Old Hotel (1988)
Endangered Species (1989)
Castle of Days (1992)
The Young Wolfe (1992)
Strange Travelers (2000)
Innocents Aboard (2004)
Starwater Strains (2005)
The Best of Gene Wolfe (2009)
"How I Lost the Second World War and Helped Turn Back the German Invasion" (1973)
"The Death of Doctor Island" (1973)
"Straw" (1975)
"The Woman the Unicorn Loved" (1981)
"A Cabin on the Coast" (1984)
A Walking Tour of the Shambles (2002)
"Memorare" (2007)
Severian
Ascian language


URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Dancers_at_the_End_of_Time
Content:

The Dancers at the End of Time is a series of science fiction novels and short stories written by Michael Moorcock, the setting of which is the End of Time, an era "where entropy is king and the universe has begun collapsing upon itself".[1] The inhabitants of this era are immortal decadents, who create flights of fancy via the use of power rings that draw on energy devised and stored by their ancestors millions of years prior. Time travel is possible, and throughout the series various points in time are visited and revisited. Space travellers are also common, but most residents of the End of Time find leaving the planet distasteful and clichéd. The title of the series is itself taken from a poem by a fictitious 19th-century poet, Ernest Wheldrake, which Mrs. Amelia Underwood quotes in The End of All Songs.[2] "Ernest Wheldrake" had been a pseudonym used by Algernon Charles Swinburne.[3]
The original trilogy (An Alien Heat, The Hollow Lands, and The End of All Songs) was published between 1972 and 1976.[4] The trilogy purports to tell the last love story in human history. Other stories in this sequence include The Transformation of Miss Mavis Ming (also known as A Messiah at the End of Time) which is a rewrite of the novella Constant Fire. Several short stories, some of which were included in the collection Legends from the End of Time, were published in New Worlds 7–10 (the paperback revival of the magazine). Short stories featuring Elric ("Elric at the End of Time"), and Jerry Cornelius ("The Murderer's Song") also feature characters and places from the End of Time.
Main characters in the series include Jherek Carnelian, one of the few humans at the End of Time to have been born naturally, rather than created; Mrs Amelia Underwood, a time traveller from the late 19th century; the enigmatic Lord Jagged; and Miss Mavis Ming in the eponymous The Transformation of Miss Mavis Ming, which also features the Fireclown. The 1993 Millennium omnibus edition of Legends from the End of Time ostensibly assembles all the stories and The Transformation of Miss Mavis Ming – under the title Constant Fire – but was affected by severe printing errors and omits the final six lines of Elric at the End of Time and all but the final chapter of Constant Fire. These were corrected for the 1997 Orion edition.


## The End of Time
The prologue of An Alien Heat calls it "a story of Jherek Carnelian, who did not know the meaning of morality, and Mrs. Amelia Underwood, who knew everything about it".[5] The novel begins with a discussion between Jherek Carnelian and his mother, the Iron Orchid, about the meaning of the word virtuous. Carnelian, who has looked the word up in an ancient dictionary, finds the concept "bewildering".
Jherek meets his future love, Amelia Underwood, at an extravagant party hosted by the Duke of Queens, the theme of which is "disaster". The Duke of Queens intends the centerpiece of this entertainment to be an alien, Yusharisp, who tries to warn them that the universe will soon end; the people merely find this boring, and the entertainment falls flat. My Lady Charlotina freezes Yusharisp for transport to her menagerie. Jherek is delighted when Mrs. Amelia Underwood reacts to this by exclaiming "Let the poor creature go! Though he is neither human nor Christian, he is still one of God's creatures and has a right to his liberty!"
An example of how lightly sex, including incest and homosexuality, is treated at the End of Time can be found in the early chapters of An Alien Heat. In the chapter "A Conversation with the Iron Orchid" Jherek has sex with his mother, and in the chapter "Carnelian Conceives a New Affectation" he has a same-sex encounter with Lord Jagged. Likewise, in Legends from the End of Time, the Iron Orchid makes love to My Lady Charlotina. When Jherek decides to fall in love with Mrs. Underwood to the exclusion of everyone else, everyone applauds his original thinking.


## Landscape
The landscapes at the End of Time are almost entirely artificial or illusory, created by the inhabitants and constantly being altered. In the first chapter of An Alien Heat, the Iron Orchid and Jherek Carnelian awaken after the picnic they have created to find that the sea has been turned a shade of cerise, and the cliff with two palm trees that had previously been behind them had been replaced by a twelve-storey silver pagoda.[6] Beneath the decoration, however, the Earth is a sterile wasteland lit by a dim red sun.
In the short story "Elric at the End of Time" the inhabitants of the end of time attempt to entertain Elric of Melniboné (and amuse themselves) by creating an adventure to keep Elric occupied. Elric is no stranger to chaos and is completely convinced that he has in fact been transported to a realm of chaos. This is largely due to the unexpected, bizarre (and often instantaneous) changes which his hosts make to the landscape.


## Plot


### The Dancers at the End of Time
The title of this volume comes from the poem "Hothouse Flowers" by Theodore Wratislaw.
An alien named Yusharisp comes to Earth to warn its remaining inhabitants that the universe is coming to an end; his own planet has already disappeared, and the Earth is sure to follow. Earth's inhabitants are unfazed as they believe him to be yet another doomsayer; the End of the Earth has been predicted for centuries. Jherek is far more interested in Mrs Amelia Underwood, a time traveller from Victorian England, as he is fascinated by the Victorian era. Jherek resolves to fall in love with her. Mrs Underwood, at first repulsed by the debauchery of the End of Time, finally comes to believe that Jherek is sincere in his affections and starts teaching him about moral values. She falls in love with him at last; as they are about to embrace, however, she is returned to her own time. Jherek, heartbroken, decides to rescue her, and travels to 19th-century London, using the time machine from Moorcock's Behold the Man.
Jherek is inexperienced to the point of naiveté about the Victorian Era, despite his interest in it, and a (temporally) local thief, Snoozer Vine, tricks him into becoming an accomplice to Snoozer's latest scam. Not surprisingly, Jherek proves to be a poor criminal, and is quickly arrested, jailed and sent to trial. To his surprise, the judge appears to be none other than his friend, Lord Jagged, but claims to be one Jagger. Jherek is sentenced to death, as the case against him is unequivocal, but he cannot understand why all the people around him are so upset; inhabitants of the End of Time are immortal, and for them death is merely transitory. Jherek is hanged, only to wake up among his friends at the End of Time, who tell him that to them, he has only been gone for a second.
The title of this volume comes from the poem "The Last Word" by Ernest Dowson.
Reunited at the end of Time, Jherek and the other inhabitants of the End of Time have returned to their preferred amusements of parties and games. They are interrupted by a ship of alien musician/pirates, the Lat. Hunted by the Lat, Jherek stumbles into a subterranean school built centuries ago to protect the last children of that era from the tyrant director Pecking Pa the Eighth (a reference to Sam Peckinpah). The time in the school is constantly recycled by a robot nanny so old she has started to break down, and as a result is recycling the same week repeatedly. The teacher-robot mistakes Jherek for one of her children as she has forgotten that there is anything outside her school, and keeps him. When she realises her mistake, she agrees to send him back to 1896; her ability to recycle time means that she can function as a time machine.
Returned to the 19th century, Jherek heads for Bromley, where Mrs Amelia Underwood lives. On the way, Jherek meets H. G. Wells and explains that he is a time traveller, but is met only with Wells's ironic disbelief. Jherek is finally reunited with Mrs Underwood but also forced to confront her husband Mr Underwood. Mr. Underwood is so suspicious of their story that a reluctant Mrs Underwood runs away with Jherek. Chased by the police, the two are rescued by a journalist, Mr Jackson who, like Judge Jagger, bears a strong resemblance to Lord Jagged.
The police catch up with the fleeing couple, but are interrupted in their attempted arrest by the appearance of the Lat, the Iron Orchid and a number of other residents of the End of Time. Chaos ensues as the police and the Lat start fighting, and the fabric of time itself begins disintegrating. The time travellers start vanishing, and Jackson, who finally reveals himself to be Lord Jagged (also Judge Jagger), takes Jherek and Mrs Underwood to a time machine that will take them to the End of Time. The machine appears to malfunction; instead of delivering them to the End of Time, it maroons them in what appears to be the Lower Devonian period.
The title of this volume comes from the poem "Dregs" by Ernest Dowson.
Jherek and Mrs Amelia Underwood, after spending some time alone in the Devonian, meet Una Persson and Captain Oswald Bastable, who introduce themselves as members of the Guild of Temporal Adventurers. They explain the notion of the multiverse as the combination of all simultaneously existing realities before sending Jherek and Amelia back to the End of Time. There, Jherek finds all his friends who had vanished from 1896 alive and well, except for Lord Jagged who has yet to return. Amelia is now more tolerant towards the people of the End of Time, though still occasionally revolted by their lack of morals. She and Jherek resume the life they led in An Alien Heat, which is interrupted by the sudden arrival of a shell shocked, crazed Mr Underwood, Inspector Springer and a dozen policemen, and the Lat.
Jherek, the Duke of Queens, the policemen, Amelia and Mr Underwood seek refuge from the Lat in one of the Lost Cities, which hold the energy used by the people of the End of Time to alter matter through their rings, and are surprised to find it crumbling, and the sun gone. They are joined by Yusharisp and the end-of-time resident Lord Mongrove, a manic-depressive giant who explains that the apocalypse has begun, and that they are the sole survivors. The group realises with horror that their energy rings are no longer working. In light of their impending doom, Amelia finally admits that her love for Jherek is more important to her than morals or convention.
The Iron Orchid and Lord Jagged, by now assumed to be dead, appear. Lord Jagged reveals himself to be Jherek's father, and a time traveller from the 21st century. After learning of the Earth's impending destruction, he sought to preserve humanity by sending a "new Adam and Eve" to the beginning of time, thus creating a loop that would prevent humanity from spending thousands of years relearning the basics of civilisation. For genetic reasons, he chose Jherek and Amelia and orchestrated their meeting. Amelia and Jherek's marooning in the Devonian was not part of the plan; they did not, in fact, travel back in time, but too far into the future, past the end of the world in which they were currently residing. Upon realising this, Jagged understood that time is circular, not linear as was previously assumed, and devised a new plan. While his friends are devastated, he shows unwavering optimism and surprises everyone by creating a new sun with his energy ring. He proceeds to explain that energy can be drawn from any existing reality within the multiverse; this, combined with the technology that "recycled" time in the underground school, can be used to sustain the Earth forever.
Now reassured that the Earth is safe in a time loop and provided with a new source of energy, the End of Timers resurrect their friends who died in the aborted apocalypse, and rebuild their world. Amelia, now comfortable at the End of Time, becomes popular. During a visit to Mr Underwood in the Lost City, she is faced with his conviction that she is damned when she tells him of her belief that God is dead. While she struggles with her conscience and her newfound atheism, her husband travels back to the 19th century and she decides to marry Jherek. When Lord Jagged offers to send both her and Jherek into the future, out of the time loop and after the end of the world to start a new civilisation, they accept.


### Legends from the End of Time
Pale Roses begins with the destruction of the rainbow part of Werther de Goethe's creation Rain by the Everlasting Concubine, Mistress Christia, and Werther's despair. After a short interlude, Werther discovers, by the use of a parachute that closely resembles a Hot air balloon, a child (Catherine Lily Marguerite Natasha Dolores Beatrice Machineshop-Seven Flambeau Gratitude) who is the fourteen-year-old daughter of two time travellers, and deigns to take on the role of her now deceased parents.
Following a masquerade with the theme of Childhood, Werther is passionately overcome and engages in sexual intercourse with Catherine. After the event, disgusted by what he perceives to be the enormity of his acts, he is even more disgusted in Catherine for having enjoyed what she describes as le petit mal. The story climaxes with Werther's suicide by jumping from his tower unaided by his parachute and his subsequent resurrection.
It is then revealed that Catherine is really Mistress Christia in disguise, the series of events being an attempt to reconcile after her having destroyed his rainbow.
White Stars: after discovering that he had inadvertently destroyed one of Lord Shark the Unknown's experiments with lichen, the Duke of Queens offers to duel with him to rid himself of his guilt.
In Ancient Shadows, a time traveller, Dafnish Armatuce, and her son, Snuffles, arrive at the End of Time, and become involved with Miss Mavis Ming.


### The Transformation of Miss Mavis Ming
Chronicling the transformation of Miss Mavis Ming and the parts played by Doctor Volospion, his fellow residents at the End of Time, and Mr Emmanuel Bloom, also known as The Fireclown. The ending originally involved a scene where the main character, Mavis Ming, was whipped into submission by Bloom. This was later rewritten by the author.[7] The novel has also been published, with differences, under the titles A Messiah at the End of Time and Constant Fire.


### Elric at the End of Time
"Elric at the End of Time" is one of two Elric short stories included in the eponymous collection, Elric at the End of Time. Its characters include Elric, Una Persson, and Lord Jagged.


## Characters


### Jherek Carnelian
Jherek Carnelian, son of the Iron Orchid and an unknown father (later revealed to be Lord Jagged) is the protagonist of the novels An Alien Heat, The Hollow Lands and The End of All Songs. Jherek is almost unique among the natives of The End of Time, in that he was born, rather than created. Only Werther De Goethe is mentioned as also having been born, implying that this trait is something of a rarity in this time period.
Jherek's childhood and adolescence subsequently provided a great deal of novelty and interest for the Iron Orchid and her clique, and left Jherek with a notable childlike freshness and creativity, compared to the majority of his contemporaries. This makes him something of a trend-setter among his peers. In particular, his fascination with the past has made him a recognised expert in the field – the nearest thing The End of Time has to a historian. He is particularly interested in the 19th and early 20th centuries. A million or more years of lost records and misinformation have taken their toll, however, and Jherek's attempts to recreate elements of the era are often comically inaccurate.
Jherek's entire existence is later revealed to be part of a complicated scheme of Lord Jagged's to survive the End of Time by selectively breeding a race of humans whose DNA renders them immune to the tendency for time to heal itself by rejecting time travellers who journey to the past, and flinging them forward to their point of origin, or beyond. This tendency is called the "Morphail Effect" and it is named after Dr. Brannart Morphail, a character in the novel.
Jherek may be an incarnation of Moorcock's recurring character Jerry Cornelius.


### Mrs Amelia Underwood
A denizen of 19th century Bromley, she arrives at a party hosted by the Duke of Queens under mysterious circumstances after she is kidnapped from her own age. She is married to the stuffy Mr. Underwood, who becomes a comic presence in the second and third books. She is a lovely young woman and, although her Victorian upbringing has made a strict moralist of her, she gradually begins to thaw under Jherek's influence. In her childhood, she travelled with her father, a missionary, into exotic locations: these experiences planted the seeds of tolerance.
At first, her sense of duty makes her tolerate Jherek, despite his vexing romantic blandishments; she tells herself that, as a good Christian, she must indoctrinate him into the mysteries of Virtue. Later, her personality begins to blossom, and she realises she loves Jherek.


### The Iron Orchid
The last woman to give birth on Earth, the Iron Orchid is Jherek's mother. Surprised that she had a child, she delights in her son, and encourages his creativity and endeavors. She is fond of Jherek's company, often having picnics with him.


### Lord Jagged
Lord Jagged is a time traveller, and, unlike Jherek and the Iron Orchid, is not a native to the End of Time. He is the father of Jherek by the Iron Orchid, and is later shown to be manipulating various events that occur in the series.
In the short story, Elric at the End of Time, Lord Jagged assumes the persona of the chaos Lord Arioch, returning Elric to his own realm. Una Persson later compliments him on the imitation, saying:[8]
Your disguise was wonderful, Jagged. How did you manage to imitate that character so thoroughly? It convinced Elric. He really thought you were whatever it was—a Chaos Duke? I mean, it's almost as if you were this fellow 'Arioch'...
Lord Jagged, however, does not reply to this. Instead, he "[puffs] on his pipe and [smiles] a secret and superior smile".[8]


### Werther de Goethe
Werther de Goethe is named for the main character of Goethe's novel The Sorrows of Young Werther and for Goethe himself, and is likewise angst ridden. He features as the main character in the short story "Pale Roses". Werther is the only other character from the end of time who was born, rather than created through the use of power rings.


### Duke of Queens
The Duke of Queens is known throughout the End of Time for his outrageous creations. His first appearance is in An Alien Heat. After having adjusted the geography where the Iron Orchid and Jherek lunched and turning the sea into a deep pink, described as almost cerise, he is shown to be once more experimenting with artificial wings, to the chagrin of Iron Orchid, who wonders why he insists that they are a success.


### My Lady Charlotina
My Lady Charlotina lives under the last permanent body of water on Earth, Lake Billy the Kid. Capricious, she often changes her skin tone to unusual colors. A jealous collector, she has one of the world's largest menageries of time and space travelers. She is the patron of Brannart Morphail whose laboratories share her apartments under the lake.


### Brannart Morphail
Brannart Morphail is a self-styled scientist who specializes in Time and time travel. He is short, ugly, and has both a club foot and a hump. The Morphail Effect, a law of time that prevents time travel paradox, is named after him.


### Mistress Christia, The Everlasting Concubine
Mistress Christia is the expression of feminine beauty at the end of time. Beloved by all at the End of Time, she is a favorite at gatherings, always being the first to arrive.


### Bishop Castle
Formerly known as "King Rook", Bishop Castle has interest in all thing religious. He wears a ten-foot high mitre.


### Lord Mongrove
Lord Mongrove appears as a sad hulking giant. Obsessed with darker emotions, his style in clothing and dwelling are depressing, gloomy affairs. He claims he has no friends, but appreciates Werther de Goethe's aesthetic.


### Li Pao
Li Pao is a time traveler from the 23rd century. He is disgusted by the decadence and excesses of the people at the End of Time, and often chastises them for their amoral ways, despite always attending their parties and gatherings.


### Miss Mavis Ming
Miss Mavis Ming appears in the short story "Ancient Shadows", playing host to Dafnish Armatuce and her son, Snuffles, and also in the novel The Transformation of Miss Mavis Ming, where she escapes from the machinations of Doctor Volospion. She has a small role in Moorcock's spy novel parody The Chinese Agent (1970), where she describes herself as a one-quarter Chinese former exotic dancer who used to perform a striptease under the name "Dawn Flower Ming, the Geisha Gusher".


## Critical response
The book is included in Interzone editor David Pringle's Science Fiction: The 100 Best Novels (1985). Hari Kunzru, writing in the Guardian, described The Dancers at the End of Time trilogy as "one of the great postwar English fantasies".[9]


## Appearances in other media


### Books
Caitlin R. Kiernan's 1995 short story "Giants in the Earth", a prequel to An Alien Heat, relates the societal debut of a 7-year-old Jherek Carnelian to the residents of the End of Time.
In 2011, Rebel at the End of Time, another prequel to An Alien Heat and written by Steve Aylett, was published by PS Publishing. It shares a setting and several characters with Moorcock's sequence. The events of the novel, involving the arrival of a 21st-century revolutionary militant at the End of Time, are sufficiently inconsequential to have been mostly forgotten by the time An Alien Heat begins, with the exception of An Alien Heat's passing mention of a fleeting fad for flags.


### Music
Moorcock contributed vocals and harmonica to the Spirits Burning & Michael Moorcock albums An Alien Heat[10] and The Hollow Lands.[10] Most of the lyrics were lifted from or based on text in novels from his The Dancers at the End of Time trilogy. The albums were produced by Spirits Burning leader Don Falcone, and included contributions from Albert Bouchard and other members of Blue Öyster Cult, as well as former members of Hawkwind.
The band Howlin' Rain features the song "Dancers at the End of Time" on their Magnificent Fiend album. The song's chorus is "Mrs. Amelia Underwood/Carry my heart in your hands/Jesus will shine on you brightly/Into the hollow lands".


## References
"Internet Speculative Fiction Database". isfdb.org. Retrieved 17 December 2007.
"Moorcock's Miscellany". Archived from the original on 23 November 2007. Retrieved 17 December 2007.
Brown, Charles N.; William G. Contento. "The Locus Index to Science Fiction (1984–1998)". Retrieved 17 December 2007.
Contento, William G. "Index to Science Fiction Anthologies and Collections". Archived from the original on 1 January 2008. Retrieved 17 December 2007.


### Notes
^ Steven Wu. ""Dancers at the End of Time, The", review". Archived from the original on 8 May 2006. Retrieved 13 April 2006.
^ Omnibus edition, Granada. The End of All Songs. p. 650. So shall they dance, until the end of time
^ Edmund Gosse, The Life of Algernon Swinburne (1917), p44.
^ Ian Davey. "Bibliography of works by Michael Moorcock". Retrieved 13 April 2006.
^ An Alien Heat. viii.
^ An Alien Heat. p. 3.
^ "A Messiah at the End of Time". Q&A with Michael Moorcock. Retrieved 14 April 2006.[dead link]
^ a b Elric at the End of Time. p. 68.
^ "When Hari Kunzru met Michael Moorcock" Archived 6 September 2016 at the Wayback Machine Retrieved 2016-03-13
^ a b "An Alien Heat – Michael Moorcock, Spirits Burning | Release Credits". AllMusic.
v
t
e
The Dreaming City (1961)
The Fireclown (1965)
The Jewel in the Skull (1967)
The Final Programme (1968)
The Mad God's Amulet (1968)
The Sword of the Dawn (1968)
The Runestaff (1969)
The Black Corridor (1969)
Behold the Man (1969)
The Chinese Agent (1970)
The Eternal Champion (1970)
Phoenix in Obsidian (1970)
The Warlord of the Air (1971)
A Cure for Cancer (1971)
The English Assassin: A Romance of Entropy (1972)
Elric of Melniboné (1972)
Breakfast in the Ruins (1972)
The Land Leviathan (1974)
The Adventures of Una Persson and Catherine Cornelius in the 20th Century (1976)
The Sailor on the Seas of Fate (1976)
The Condition of Muzak (1977)
Gloriana (1978)
Byzantium Endures (1981)
The War Hound and the World's Pain (1981)
The Steel Tsar (1981)
The Brothel in Rosenstrasse (1982)
The Laughter of Carthage (1984)
The City in the Autumn Stars (1986)
The Dragon in the Sword (1986)
Mother London (1988)
Jerusalem Commands (1992)
King of the City (2000)
Firing the Cathedral (2002)
The Vengeance of Rome (2006)
The Coming of the Terraphiles (2010)
The Whispering Swarm (2015)
The Time Dweller (1969)
The Lives and Times of Jerry Cornelius (1976)
The History of the Runestaff (1979)
The Dancers at the End of Time (1981)
A Nomad of the Time Streams (1982)
The Opium General and other stories (1984)
Elric: Song of the Black Sword (1995)
The Metatemporal Detective (2007)
Conan the Barbarian
Michael Moorcock's Multiverse
Tom Strong
England Invaded
Before Armageddon
Corum Jhaelen Irsei
Dorian Hawkmoon
Elric of Melniboné
Erekosë
Eternal Champion
Jerry Cornelius
Melniboné
Multiverse
Oswald Bastable
Stormbringer
Symbol of Chaos
Ulrich von Bek
Una Persson
New Worlds Fair
Warrior on the Edge of Time
Lucky Leif and the Longships
Mirrors
Cultösaurus Erectus
Hype
Sonic Attack
Zones
Live Chronicles
"Epic Pooh"
"Kings in Darkness"
The Land That Time Forgot
New Worlds
Airtight Garage
The Chronicle of the Black Sword
The Final Programme
Elric: Battle at the End of Time
Stormbringer RPG
Hawkmoon RPG


URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Crash_(J._G._Ballard_novel)
Content:

Crash is a novel by British author J. G. Ballard, first published in 1973 with cover designed by Bill Botten. It follows a group of car-crash fetishists who, inspired by the famous crashes of celebrities, become sexually aroused by staging and participating in car accidents.
The novel was released to divided critical reception, with many reviewers horrified by its provocative content. It was adapted into a controversial 1996 film of the same name by David Cronenberg.


## Synopsis
The story is told through the eyes of narrator James Ballard, named after the author himself, but it centers on the sinister figure of Dr. Robert Vaughan, a former TV scientist turned "nightmare angel of the highways".[1] James meets Vaughan after being injured in a car crash near London Airport. Gathering around Vaughan is a group of alienated people, all of them former crash victims, who follow him in his pursuit to re-enact the crashes of Hollywood celebrities such as Jayne Mansfield and James Dean, in order to experience what the narrator calls "a new sexuality, born from a perverse technology". Vaughan's ultimate fantasy is to die in a head-on collision with movie star Elizabeth Taylor.[2]


## Development
The Papers of J. G. Ballard at the British Library include two revised drafts of Crash (Add MS 88938/3/8). Scanned extracts from Ballard's drafts are included in Crash: The Collector's Edition, ed. Chris Beckett.[3]
In 1971, Harley Cokeliss directed a short film entitled Crash! based on a chapter in J. G. Ballard's book The Atrocity Exhibition, where Ballard is featured, talking about the ideas in his book. British actress Gabrielle Drake appeared as a passenger and car-crash victim. Ballard later developed the idea, resulting in Crash. In his draft of the novel he mentioned Drake by name, but references to her were removed from the published version.[4]


## Interpretation
Throughout Crash I have used the car not only as a sexual image, but as a total metaphor for man's life in today's society. As such the novel has a political role quite apart from its sexual content, but I would still like to think that Crash is the first pornographic novel based on technology. In a sense, pornography is the most political form of fiction, dealing with how we use and exploit each other in the most urgent and ruthless way. Needless to say, the ultimate role of Crash is cautionary, a warning against that brutal, erotic and overlit realm that beckons more and more persuasively to us from the margins of the technological landscape.[5]
— J. G. Ballard, Crash
Crash has been difficult to characterize as a novel. At some points in his career, Ballard claimed that Crash was a "cautionary tale", a view that he would later regret, asserting that it is in fact "a psychopathic hymn. But it is a psychopathic hymn which has a point".[6] Likewise, Ballard previously characterized it a science fiction novel, a position he would later take back.[citation needed]
Jean Baudrillard wrote an analysis of Crash in Simulacra and Simulation in which he declared it "the first great novel of the universe of simulation". He made note of how the fetish in the story conflates the functionality of the automobiles with that of the human body and how the characters' injuries and the damage to the vehicles are used as equivalent signs. To him, the hyperfunctionality leads to the dysfunction in the story. Quotes were used extensively to illustrate that the language of the novel employs plain, mechanical terms for the parts of the automobile and proper, medical language for human sex organs and acts. The story is interpreted as showing a merger between technology, sexuality, and death, and he further argued that by pointing out Vaughan's character takes and keeps photos of the car crashes and the mutilated bodies involved. Baudrillard stated that there is no moral judgment about the events within the novel but that Ballard himself intended it as a warning against a cultural trend.[7]
The story can be classed as dystopic.[1]


## Critical reception
The novel received divided reviews when originally published. One publisher's reader returned the verdict "This author is beyond psychiatric help. Do Not Publish!"[8] A 1973 review in The New York Times was equally horrified: "Crash is, hands-down, the most repulsive book I've yet to come across."[9]
However, retrospective opinion now considers Crash to be one of Ballard's best and most challenging works. Reassessing Crash in The Guardian, Zadie Smith wrote, "Crash is an existential book about how everybody uses everything. How everything uses everybody. And yet it is not a hopeless vision." On Ballard's legacy, she writes: "In Ballard's work there is always this mix of futuristic dread and excitement, a sweet spot where dystopia and utopia converge. For we cannot say we haven't got precisely what we dreamed of, what we always wanted, so badly."[10]


## References in popular art


### Music
The Normal's 1978 song "Warm Leatherette" was inspired by the novel, and later covered in 1980 by Grace Jones. Similarly inspired was "Miss the Girl," a 1983 single by The Creatures. The Manic Street Preachers' song "Mausoleum" from 1994's The Holy Bible contains the famous Ballard quote about his reasons for writing the book, "I wanted to rub the human face in its own vomit. I wanted to force it to look in the mirror."[11] John Foxx's album Metamatic contains songs that have Ballardian themes, such as "No-one Driving".


### Other film adaptations
An apparently unauthorized adaptation of Crash called Nightmare Angel was filmed in 1986 by Susan Emerling and Zoe Beloff. This short film bears the credit "Inspired by J. G. Ballard".[12]


## See also
Novels portal
Autassassinophilia


## References
^ a b Canton, James; Cleary, Helen; Kramer, Ann; Laxby, Robin; Loxley, Diana; Ripley, Esther; Todd, Megan; Shaghar, Hila; Valente, Alex (2016). The Literature Book. New York: DK. p. 332. ISBN 978-1-4654-2988-9.
^ Ballard, J. G. (5 October 2001). Crash. Macmillan. ISBN 978-0-312-42033-8 – via Google Books.
^ Beckett, Chris (2017). Crash: The Collector's Edition. HarperCollins.
^ Baxter, John (8 September 2011). "34, The Nasty". The Inner Man: The Life of J. G. Ballard. Hachette. ISBN 978-0-297-86352-6.
^ JonathanRosenbaum.com » Blog Archive » Sex Drive [on CRASH][usurped]
^ Groppo, Pedro (2017). "'Death and the Machine: J. G. Ballard's Crash'". Aletria. 27 (1): 161–180. doi:10.17851/2317-2096.27.1.161-180.
^ Baudrillard, Jean (1994). "Crash". Simulacra and Simulation. Translated by Glaser, Sheila Faria. Ann Arbor, MI: The University of Michigan Press. pp. 111–119. ISBN 978-0-472-09521-6.
^ Halford, Macy (20 April 2009). "J. G. Ballard". The New Yorker. ISSN 0028-792X. Retrieved 1 August 2019.
^ "Crash". The New York Times. Retrieved 31 July 2019.
^ Smith, Zadie (4 July 2014). "Sex and wheels: Zadie Smith on JG Ballard's Crash". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Retrieved 31 July 2019.
^ Bradshaw, Peter; Sudjic, Deyan; Simpson, Dave; Sinclair, Iain; Lawson, Mark (20 April 2009). "How JG Ballard cast his shadow right across the arts". The Guardian – via www.theguardian.com.
^ Taylor, Brett (October–November 2009). "The Forgotten Crash: Nightmare Angel". Video Watchdog (152): 12–16.


## External links
The Terminal Collection: JG Ballard First Editions
Crash Archived 5 October 2016 at the Wayback Machine at the British Library
v
t
e
The Wind from Nowhere (1961)
The Drowned World (1962)
The Burning World (1964)
The Crystal World (1966)
The Atrocity Exhibition (1969)
Crash (1973)
Concrete Island (1974)
High-Rise (1975)
The Unlimited Dream Company (1979)
Hello America (1981)
Empire of the Sun (1984)
The Day of Creation (1987)
Running Wild (1988)
The Kindness of Women (1991)
Rushing to Paradise (1994)
Cocaine Nights (1996)
Super-Cannes (2000)
Millennium People (2003)
Kingdom Come (2006)
"Mobile" (1957)
"The Concentration City" (1957)
"Track 12" (1958)
"Zone of Terror" (1960)
"The Sound-Sweep" (1960)
"The Voices of Time" (1960)
"Chronopolis" (1960)
"Studio 5, The Stars" (1961)
"Deep End" (1961)
"Mr F. is Mr F." (1961)
"Billennium" (1962)
"Minus One" (1963)
"The Recognition" (1967)
" The Day of Forever" (1967)
"Why I Want to Fuck Ronald Reagan" (1968)
"Venus Smiles" (1971)
The Voices of Time and Other Stories (1962)
Billennium (1962)
Passport to Eternity (1963)
The 4-Dimensional Nightmare (1963)
The Terminal Beach (1964)
The Impossible Man (1966)
The Overloaded Man (1967)
The Disaster Area (1967)
The Day of Forever (1967)
Vermilion Sands (1971)
Chronopolis and Other Stories (1971)
Low-Flying Aircraft and Other Stories (1976)
The Best of J. G. Ballard (1977)
The Best Short Stories of J. G. Ballard (1978)
The Venus Hunters (1980)
Myths of the Near Future (1982)
The Voices of Time (1985)
Memories of the Space Age (1988)
War Fever (1990)
The Complete Short Stories of J. G. Ballard: Volume 1 (2006)
The Complete Short Stories of J. G. Ballard: Volume 2 (2006)
A User's Guide to the Millennium (1996)
Extreme Metaphors (2012)
Miracles of Life (2008)
When Dinosaurs Ruled the Earth (1970)
Crash! (1971)
Empire of the Sun (1987)
Crash (1996)
The Atrocity Exhibition (1998)
Low-Flying Aircraft (2002)
High-Rise (2015)


URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Walk_to_the_End_of_the_World
Content:

The Holdfast Chronicles is a series of science fiction books by American author Suzy McKee Charnas.
The series consists of four books:
Walk to the End of the World (1974)
Motherlines (1978)
The Furies (1994)
The Conqueror's Child (1999).


## Reception
Salon.com reviewer Polly Shulman declared that "the Holdfast tetralogy offers a fascinating look back at the permutations of the feminist imagination in recent years, and it underlines the ideals and challenges faced by feminists ..."[1]


## Awards
The entire series was inducted into the Gaylactic Spectrum Hall of Fame in 2003. Motherlines and Walk to the End of the World won a retrospective James Tiptree, Jr. Award, and The Conqueror's Child won the award in 1999.[2]
The Furies was nominated for the 1995 Lambda Literary Award for Science Fiction and Fantasy.[3]


## References
^ "Matriarchy blues", April 21, 2000
^ James Tiptree, Jr. Award 1999 Winner www.tiptree.org. Retrieved 28-02-2011
^ Lambda Literary Award site Archived 2008-04-19 at the Wayback Machine


## Sources
Mohr, Dunja M. Worlds Apart: Dualism and Transgression in Contemporary Female Dystopias. Jefferson, NC, McFarland, 2005. [extensive chapter on the Holdfast series]


## External links
The web site of Suzy McKee Charnas.
Interview at SFFWorld.com
Suzy McKee Charnas at the Internet Speculative Fiction Database
v
t
e
Motherlines and Walk to the End of the World by Suzy McKee Charnas
The Left Hand of Darkness by Ursula K. Le Guin
The Female Man and "When It Changed" by Joanna Russ
A Woman of the Iron People by Eleanor Arnason (1991, tie)
White Queen by Gwyneth Jones (1991, tie)
China Mountain Zhang by Maureen F. McHugh (1992)
Ammonite by Nicola Griffith (1993)
"The Matter of Seggri" by Ursula K. Le Guin (1994, tie)
Larque on the Wing by Nancy Springer (1994, tie)
Waking the Moon by Elizabeth Hand (1995, tie)
The Memoirs Of Elizabeth Frankenstein by Theodore Roszak (1995, tie)
"Mountain Ways" by Ursula K. Le Guin (1996, tie)
The Sparrow by Mary Doria Russell (1996, tie)
Black Wine by Candas Jane Dorsey (1997, tie)
"Travels With The Snow Queen" by Kelly Link (1997, tie)
"Congenital Agenesis of Gender Ideation" by Raphael Carter (1998)
The Conqueror's Child by Suzy McKee Charnas (1999)
Wild Life by Molly Gloss (2000)
The Kappa Child by Hiromi Goto (2001)
Light by M. John Harrison (2002, tie)
"Stories for Men" by John Kessel (2002, tie)
Set This House in Order: A Romance of Souls by Matt Ruff (2003)
Camouflage by Joe Haldeman (2004, tie)
Not Before Sundown by Johanna Sinisalo (2004, tie)
Air by Geoff Ryman (2005)
The Orphan's Tales: In the Night Garden by Catherynne M. Valente (2006, tie)
Half Life by Shelley Jackson (2006, tie)
James Tiptree Jr.: The Double Life of Alice B. Sheldon by Julie Phillips (2006, special recognition)
The Carhullan Army by Sarah Hall (2007)
The Knife of Never Letting Go by Patrick Ness (2008, tie)
Filter House by Nisi Shawl (2008, tie)
Cloud and Ashes: Three Winter’s Tales by Greer Gilman (2009, tie)
Ōoku: The Inner Chambers by Fumi Yoshinaga (2009, tie)
Baba Yaga Laid an Egg by Dubravka Ugrešić (2010)
Redwood and Wildfire by Andrea Hairston (2011)
The Drowning Girl by Caitlín R. Kiernan (2012, tie)
Ancient, Ancient by Kiini Ibura Salaam (2012, tie)
Rupetta by N. A. Sulway (2013)
The Girl in the Road by Monica Byrne (2014, tie)
My Real Children by Jo Walton (2014, tie)
"The New Mother" by Eugene Fischer (2015, tie)
Lizard Radio by Pat Schmatz (2015, tie)
When the Moon Was Ours by Anna-Marie McLemore (2016)
Who Runs the World? by Virginia Bergin (2017)
"They Will Dream in the Garden" by Gabriela Damián Miravete (2018)
Freshwater by Akwaeke Emezi (2019)
Ife-Iyoku, the Tale of Imadeyunuagbon by Oghenechovwe Donald Ekpeki (2020)
Light from Uncommon Stars by Ryka Aoki (2021, tie)
Sorrowland by Rivers Solomon (2021, tie)

This article about a 1970s science fiction novel is a stub. You can help Wikipedia by expanding it.
See guidelines for writing about novels. Further suggestions might be found on the article's talk page.
v
t
e
This article about a novel of the 1970s with a lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, or queer theme is a stub. You can help Wikipedia by expanding it.
See guidelines for writing about novels. Further suggestions might be found on the article's talk page.
v
t
e


URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Centauri_Device
Content:

The Centauri Device is the third novel by English author M. John Harrison. The novel, originally conceived as an "anti-space opera" would ultimately go on to make a major contribution to revitalising the subgenre and influencing the works of later authors such as Iain M. Banks and Alastair Reynolds.


## Outline
Harrison has said that the book breaks what were then the central tenets of space opera, namely that the protagonist plays an active role in driving the plot forward, that the universe is comprehensible to humans and that the universe is anthropocentric.[1] These preconceptions were still common in the more literary space operas of the time, such as Samuel R. Delany's Nova (which Harrison described as "highly readable but finally unsatisfying") and, in terms of tone, Harrison's novel more closely hews to the unconventional genre-bending of Alfred Bester's The Stars My Destination and The Paradox Men by Charles L. Harness, with the bleak cosmic outlook being influenced by Barrington J. Bayley's The Star Virus.[2]
The viewpoint character, John Truck, is a passive hero, a space captain in the year 2367 who ships drugs when he can find them and legitimate cargo when he cannot. The twentieth century is long forgotten and misremembered, with Leonid Brezhnev and Richard Nixon described as "lords" and Hermann Göring as an artist. The dyne-field connects planets and yet seems to merge them, the decayed industrial wasteland "Carter's Snort" in Britain merges with the slums of Junk City on Avernus. These worlds are stagnant, controlled by corrupt politics, organised crime and the bizarre "Opener" religion, who see "honesty of bodily function [as] the sole valid praise of God." These landscapes are Truck's natural home and a hiding place from General Alice Gaw of the Israeli World Government and Colonel Gaddafi ben Barka of the United Arab Socialist Republics. (True to the strong vein of anarchism in Harrison's work, neither of these political entities resemble their twentieth century counterparts.)
Truck is being hunted because of his ancestry, as he is half-Centauran (the rest of his race having been killed by human bombing some decades earlier) and the only person who can activate the newly unearthed Centauri Device. The UASR want the device as they believe it to be a useful propaganda tool, the Openers believe it to be God, the Aesthete Anarchists (an exuberant civilization of spacefarers who travel the void in spaceships named after works of art) do not know what it is but want to possess it anyway, while the World Government have correctly surmised that it is a bomb. As the Device is useless without Truck all four factions try to hunt him down. Unable to hide, he tries to fight but the forces are prepared to kill those around him. In his desperation, he takes the only step open to him and activates the devices, destroying himself, the Solar System and the Alpha Centauri system in a Hypernova.
The epilogue is designed to distance the reader from the text still further, reducing the events of the book to nothing more than "a dramatised account" and offering a variety of theories on the matter, mostly, it admits, based on nothing more than guesswork.


## Critical reception
The novel played a major role in the formation of the "New Space Opera" of the 1980s and 1990s, inspiring authors such as Iain Banks. In particular, Banks has commented that "M. John Harrison should be a megastar, but he probably couldn’t be because he’s too rarefied a taste"[3] and in an Arena SF interview, he gave The Pastel City (part of the Viriconium sequence) as his favourite Harrison title.[4] Alastair Reynolds has also been influenced by Harrison's work, including a reference to The Centauri Device in his essay "Future Histories", which later formed the afterword to the collection Galactic North.[5] Ken MacLeod remembered reading it in 1975, originally thinking it would be a standard space adventure, before being inspired to seek out and ultimately write books in a similar vein.[6] More generally, many motifs from the novel have become part of the scenery of modern space opera, in particular the excessively lengthy and baroque spaceship naming convention.
However, reviews from those preparing critical surveys of Harrison's work have been tepid, with both John Clute[7] and Rhys Hughes[8] naming it as his least successful novel, though with some high points. Perhaps the most significant detractor of the novel is Harrison himself who, in a 2001 interview with SF Site, described it as "the crappiest thing I ever wrote."[9]
David Pringle assessed it as: "A stylish, dark-hued but tongue-in-cheek space opera, in which anarchist space pirates, with a taste for fin-de-siecle art, fly spacecraft with names like 'Driftwood of Decadence' and 'The Green Carnation'. Self-conscious and literary, but nevertheless a virtuoso performance."[10]


## Links to other works
The novel has some connection to the Viriconium sequence through the enigmatic character Dr. Grishkin, who appears in The Centauri Device as the leader of the Opener cult and in the Viriconium story "Lamia Mutable", first published in Again, Dangerous Visions and again in The Machine in Shaft Ten. However, as this story has been delisted from all editions of Viriconium Nights (along with "Events Witnessed from a City" and the novella-length version of In Viriconium) since the first Ace Books edition, it can not be taken as "canon", if such a term could be said to apply to the famously mutable dying earth in which it is set.
An extract, under the title of 'The Wolf That Follows' was printed in the anthology New Worlds 7 with an illustration by Judith Clute. A novelette version appeared in the January 1974 edition of The Magazine of Fantasy & Science Fiction, under the title "The Centauri Device".


## References
^ "the centauri device". The Ambiente Hotel. 2 April 2012. Retrieved 15 December 2012.
^ "Bayley, Barrington J.". SF Encyclopedia (3rd ed.). Retrieved 15 December 2012.
^ "Iain M. Banks: Textualities". textualities.net. Retrieved 15 December 2012.
^ "The Culture FAQ". i-dig Info. Retrieved 15 December 2012.
^ Main influences discussed extensively in Alastair Reynolds, Essay: "Future Histories", Locus, Vol. 57, No. 5, Issue 550, November 2006, p. 39; also included as afterword to Galactic North
^ "The Centauri Device" (PDF). SFX Magazine. Retrieved 15 December 2012.
^ "Harrison, M. John". SF Encyclopedia (3rd ed.). Retrieved 15 December 2012.
^ "Climbing to Viriconium". Fantastic Metropolis. Retrieved 15 December 2012.
^ "The SF Site: A Conversation With M. John Harrison". The SF Site. Retrieved 15 December 2012.
^ David Pringle, The Ultimate Guide to Science Fiction. Grafton, 1990, p. 67


URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Dispossessed
Content:

Hugo Award for Best Novel (1975)
The Dispossessed (subtitled An Ambiguous Utopia) is a 1974 anarchist utopian science fiction novel by American writer Ursula K. Le Guin, one of her seven Hainish Cycle novels. It is one of a small number of books to win all three awards—Hugo, Locus, and Nebula—for best science fiction or fantasy novel.[1] It achieved a degree of literary recognition unusual for science fiction because of its exploration of themes such as anarchism and revolutionary societies, capitalism, utopia, individualism, and collectivism.
The novel features the development of the mathematical theory underlying a fictional ansible, a device capable of faster-than-light communication, which can send messages without delay, even between star systems. This device plays a critical role in the Hainish Cycle. The invention of the ansible places the novel first in the internal chronology of the Hainish Cycle, although it was the fifth to be published.[2]


## Background
In her introduction to the Library of America reprint in 2017, Le Guin reflected on her past 40 years by writing:
The Dispossessed started as a very bad short story, which I didn't try to finish but couldn't quite let go. There was a book in it, and I knew it, but the book had to wait for me to learn what I was writing about and how to write about it. I needed to understand my own passionate opposition to the war that we were, endlessly it seemed, waging in Vietnam, and endlessly protesting at home. If I had known then that my country would continue making aggressive wars for the rest of my life, I might have had less energy for protesting that one. But, knowing only that I didn't want to study war no more,[3] I studied peace. I started by reading a whole mess of utopias and learning something about pacifism and Gandhi and nonviolent resistance. This led me to the nonviolent anarchist writers such as Peter Kropotkin and Paul Goodman. With them I felt a great, immediate affinity. They made sense to me in the way Lao Tzu did. They enabled me to think about war, peace, politics, how we govern one another and ourselves, the value of failure, and the strength of what is weak. So, when I realized that nobody had yet written an anarchist utopia, I finally began to see what my book might be. And I found that its principal character, whom I'd first glimpsed in the original misbegotten story, was alive and well—my guide to Anarres.[4]
Le Guin's parents, anthropologist Alfred and writer Theodora Kroeber, were friends with J. Robert Oppenheimer; Le Guin stated that Oppenheimer was the model for Shevek, the book's protagonist.[5]: 2


## Meaning of the title
It has been suggested that Le Guin's title is a reference to Dostoyevsky's novel about anarchists, Demons (Russian: Бесы, Bésy), one popular English-language translation of which is titled The Possessed.[6] Many of the philosophical underpinnings and ecological concepts came from Murray Bookchin's Post-Scarcity Anarchism (1971), according to a letter Le Guin sent to Bookchin.[7] Anarres citizens are dispossessed not just by political choice, but by the very lack of actual resources to possess. Here, again, Le Guin draws a contrast with the natural wealth of Urras, and the competitive behaviors this fosters.[8]


## Setting
The Dispossessed is set on Anarres and Urras, the twin inhabited worlds of Tau Ceti. Urras is divided into several states, but is dominated by two rival superpowers, A-Io and Thu. While on Urras, the main character spends most of his time in A-Io, a state with a capitalist economy and a patriarchal system. The state of Thu is never actually visited, but is said to have an authoritarian system that claims to rule in the name of the proletariat. A-Io has dissent in its borders, including a few different oppositional left-wing parties, one of which is closely linked to the rival society of Thu. When a revolution is sparked in Benbili, the third major, yet undeveloped, area of Urras, A-Io invades the Thu-supported revolutionary area, generating a proxy war.
The moon, Anarres, represents a more idealist ideological structure: anarcho-syndicalism. The Anarresti, who call themselves Odonians after the founder of their political philosophy, arrived on Anarres from Urras around 200 years ago. In order to forestall an anarcho-syndicalist rebellion, the major Urrasti states gave the revolutionaries the right to live on Anarres, along with a guarantee of non-interference. Before this, Anarres had had no permanent settlements, apart from some mining facilities.
Anarres is settled after a revolution on Urras by the followers of Odo, the central character of Le Guin's 1974 short story The Day Before the Revolution.[9]
The economic and political situation of Anarres and its relation to Urras is ambiguous. The people of Anarres consider themselves as being free and independent, having broken off from the political and social influence of the old world. However, the powers of Urras consider Anarres as being essentially their mining colony, as the annual consignment of Anarres's precious metals and their distribution to major powers on Urras is a major economic event of the old world.


### Theoretical timeline
In the last chapter of The Dispossessed, we learn that the Hainish people arrived at Tau Ceti 60 years previously, which is more than 100 years after the secession of the Odonians from Urras and their exodus to Anarres. Terrans are also there, and the novel occurs some time in the future, according to an elaborate chronology worked out by science fiction author Ian Watson in 1975: "the baseline date of AD 2300 for The Dispossessed is taken from the description of Earth in that book (§11) as having passed through an ecological and social collapse with a population peak of 9 billion to a low-population but highly centralized recovery economy."[10] In the same article, Watson assigns a date of AD 4870 to The Left Hand of Darkness; both dates are problematic — as Watson says himself, they are contradicted by "Genly Ai's statement that Terrans 'were ignorant until about three thousand years ago of the uses of zero'".


## Story
The chapters alternate between the two planets and between the present and the past. The even-numbered chapters, which are set on Anarres, chronologically take place first and are followed by the odd-numbered chapters, which take place on Urras. The only exceptions occur in the first and last chapters: the first takes place on both the moon and the planet; the last takes place in a spaceship.


### Anarres (chapters 2, 4, 6, 8, 10, 12)
Chapter One begins in the middle of the story. The protagonist Shevek is an Anarresti physicist attempting to develop a General Temporal Theory. The physics of the book, Principles of Simultaneity, describes time as having a much deeper, more complex structure than as it is understood. It incorporates not only mathematics and physics, but also philosophy and ethics. Shevek finds his work blocked by a jealous superior, Sabul, who controls the publication of Anarresti manuscripts. As his theories conflict with the prevailing political philosophy, Shevek believes that his ideas are discordant with Anarresti society. Throughout his time in Abbenay, he runs into old acquaintances from his adolescence and his mother, Rulag. One of his old female acquaintances, Takver, becomes involved with Shevek and the two start a relationship and have their first child together.
Shevek's work is further disrupted by his social obligation to perform manual labor during a drought in Anarres's anarchist society. To ensure survival in a harsh environment, the people of Anarres must put the needs of society ahead of their own personal desires, so Shevek performs hard agricultural labor in a dusty desert for four years instead of working on his research. After the drought, he arranges to go to Urras, having won a prestigious award for his work there, to finish and publish his theory with the help of the syndicate he set up to distribute his works. His contact with scholars on Urras and his decision to travel results in political turmoil on Anarres. Shevek is accused of being a traitor by Sabul and threatening the political separation between the two worlds. Believing that his theory will benefit the Anarresti and the wider society, Shevek embarks to Urras.


### Urras (chapters 1, 3, 5, 7, 9, 11)
Shevek's journey to the only spaceport in Anarres is eventful. Having been deemed a traitor by some groups on the planet, Shevek is nearly killed as an angry mob tries to stop him getting on the spaceship to A-Io. Arriving in A-Io, Urras, Shevek is feted. He soon finds himself disgusted with the social, sexual, and political conventions of the hierarchical capitalist society of Urras. His grievances are further explored with the outbreak of war in neighbouring Benbili, of which A-Io is involved with rivalling Thu. At Ieu Eun University, Shevek struggles with teaching the Urrasti students and is manipulated by the physicists there, who hope that his breakthrough on the General Temporal Theory will allow them to build a faster-than-light ship. A mysterious note asking him to join his 'brothers' spooks Shevek, knowing that fellow like-minded anarchists are on Urras - in the shadows. Eventually, at a dinner party, a drunken Shevek publicly denounces his peers on A-Io, scolding them for their materialistic lives and taking their splendor for granted, before leading to a disastrous sexual encounter that further alienates Shevek from his peers. He has a sobering realisation that the theory he proposes will be capitalised by the Urrasti for potential warfare, not for the benefit of society. Shevek escapes the university, contacts an underground revolutionary group from the note he found, joining in a labor protest in Nio Esseia that is violently suppressed. He flees to the Terran embassy, where he asks them to transmit his theory to all worlds. The Terrans provide him safe passage back to Anarres.


### Onboard theDavenant(chapter 13)
For interplanetary travel to his world, Anarres, Shevek is shown around a Hainish spaceship. Hainish culture is described. A Hainishman named Ketho, who sympathizes with Odonian thought, wants to disembark with Shevek when they land on Anarres. Not knowing if the Anarresti will welcome him back with open arms, Shevek remains content thinking about his family as the spaceship begins to land.


## Themes


### Symbolism
The ambiguity of Anarres's economic and political situation in relation to Urras is symbolically manifested in the low wall surrounding Anarres's single spaceport. This wall is the only place on the anarchist planet where "No Trespassing!" signs may be seen, and it is where the book begins and ends. The people of Anarres believe that the wall divides a free world from the corrupting influence of an oppressor's ships. On the other hand, the wall could be a prison wall keeping the rest of the planet imprisoned and cut off. Shevek's life attempts to answer this question.
In addition to Shevek's journey to answer questions about his society's true level of freedom, the meaning of his theories themselves weave their way into the plot; they not only describe abstract physical concepts, but they also reflect ups and downs of the characters' lives, and the transformation of the Anarresti society. An oft-quoted saying in the book is "true journey is return."[11] The meaning of Shevek's theories—which deal with the nature of time and simultaneity—have been subject to interpretation. For example, there have been interpretations that the non-linear nature of the novel is a reproduction of Shevek's theory.[12]


### Anarchism and capitalism
In her foreword to the collected Hainish novels, Le Guin notes her "great, immediate affinity" with anarchist thinkers Peter Kropotkin and Paul Goodman.[13] Elsewhere, she writes that "Odonism is anarchism," mentioning parallels with Emma Goldman, Taoism and Percy Bysshe Shelley. For Le Guin, anarchism's "principal target is the authoritarian State (capitalist or socialist); its principal moral-practical theme is cooperation (solidarity, mutual aid)."[14]
Both on Anarres and Urras, many conflicts occur between these anarchist principles and the constraints imposed by authority and society. On Anarres, there are no written laws. However, in practice, there are strong conventions about how most things should be done, which frustrate Shevek throughout the novel. Money is also not used, and instead the Anarresti rely on the DivLab database to match volunteer labor with work assignments. Via these conventions and institutions, The Dispossessed depicts an anarchist-syndicalist alternative to capitalism. Le Guin's computational economy combines a central economic plan for society with democratic decision-making on a syndicalist model, bureaucratic and computational efficiency, and a negotiated tension among syndicate federalism, individual autonomy, and the danger of centralized authority."[15]
The language spoken on Anarres also reflects anarchism. Pravic is a constructed language in the tradition of Esperanto. Pravic reflects many aspects of the philosophical foundations of utopian anarchism.[16] For instance, the use of the possessive case is strongly discouraged, a feature that also is reflected by the novel's title.[17] Children are trained to speak only about matters that interest others; anything else is "egoizing" (pp. 28–31). There is no property ownership of any kind. Shevek's daughter, upon meeting him for the first time, tells him, "You can share the handkerchief I use"[18] rather than "You may borrow my handkerchief", thus conveying the idea that the handkerchief is not owned by the girl, but is merely used by her.[19]


### Utopianism
The work is sometimes said to represent a modern revival of the utopian genre.[20] When first published, the book included the tagline: "The magnificent epic of an ambiguous utopia!" which was shortened by fans to "An ambiguous utopia" and adopted as a subtitle in certain editions.[21][22]
Le Guin brings her own innovations to the literary tradition of utopia. Many earlier utopian novels featured a visitor to utopia, as a device to teach the reader about its institutions. However The Dispossessed inverts this, by having Shevek, dissatisfied with his life in Anarres, travel to Urras. The Dispossessed also does not seek to portray Anarres as a society that is absolutely good, but only as "ambiguously good".[23]
Tom Moylan describes The Dispossessed as "the best known and the most popular of the critical utopias published in the 1970s."[24] 'Critical' utopian fiction continues to embrace utopian ideals, but it is cautious of being too prescriptive, and tends to focus on "the continuing presence of difference and imperfection within utopian society itself."[25] The Dispossessed shares with many later critical utopias, including Iain M. Banks's Culture series and Samuel R. Delany's Trouble on Triton, a focus on utopia's discontents, and an interest in how utopian society interacts with its neighbors.


### Feminism
Some critics disagree as to whether The Dispossessed should be considered a feminist utopia or a feminist science fiction novel. According to Mary Morrison of the State University of New York at Buffalo (SUNY), the anarchist themes in this book help to promote feminist themes as well.[26] Other critics, such as William Marcellino of SUNY and Sarah LeFanu, writer of "Popular Writing and Feminist Intervention in Science Fiction," argue that there are distinct anti-feminist undertones throughout the novel.[27][28]
Morrison argues that Le Guin's portrayed ideals of Taoism, the celebration of labor and the body, and desire for sexual freedom in an anarchist society contribute greatly to the book's feminist message. Taoism, which rejects dualisms and divisions in favor of a Yin and Yang balance, brings attention to the balance between not only the two planets, but between the male and female inhabitants. The celebration of labor on Anarres stems from a celebration of a mother's labor, focusing on creating life rather than on building objects. The sexual freedom on Anarres also contributes to the book's feminist message.[26]
On the other hand, some critics believe that Le Guin's feminist themes are either weak or not present. Some believe that the Taoist interdependence between the genders actually weakens Le Guin's feminist message. Marcellino believes that the anarchist themes in the novel take precedence and dwarf any feminist themes.[27] Lefanu adds that there is a difference between the feminist messages that the book explicitly presents and the anti-feminist undertones. For example, the book says that women created the society on Anarres. However, female characters seem secondary to the male protagonist, who seems to be a traditional male hero; Lefanu asserts that this subversion weakens any feminist message that Le Guin was trying to convey.[28]


### Prison abolition
Odo, the founder of Anarresti society, wrote her most influential works during a nine-year imprisonment. Anarres itself has no prisons. Its post-carceral nature becomes apparent in chapter two, when a group of Annaresti schoolchildren learn about prisons in their history lesson.[6][29] The teacher describes prisons "with the reluctance of a decent adult forced to explain an obscenity to children. Yes, he said, a prison was a place where a State put people who disobeyed its Laws."[30] Fascinated by this "perversity", the schoolchildren construct their own prison and detain one of their own inside. They are ultimately horrified by the experience.
Figurative imprisonment is an important theme in the novel too. In both the Urrasti and Anarresti parts of the novel, "time after time the question of who is being locked out or in, which side of the wall one is on, is the focus of the narrative."[31] Mark Tunik emphasises that the wall is the dominant metaphor for social constraints in The Dispossessed. While on Urras, Shevek hits "the wall of charm, courtesy, indifference." He later notes that he let a "wall be built around him" that kept him from seeing the poor people on Urras. He had been co-opted, with walls of smiles of the rich, and he didn't know how to break them down. Shevek at one point speculates that the people on Urras are not truly free, precisely because they have so many walls built between people and are so possessive. He says, "You are all in jail. Each alone, solitary, with a heap of what he owns. You live in prison, die in prison. It is all I can see in your eyes – the wall, the wall!" '[32]
It is not just the state of mind of those inside the prisons that concerns Shevek, he also notes the effect on those outside the walls. Steve Grossi says, "by building a physical wall to keep the bad in, we construct a mental wall keeping ourselves, our thoughts, and our empathy out, to the collective detriment of all." Shevek himself later says, "those who build walls are their own prisoners."[33]


## Publication
In Le Guin's book-writing process, the story always came to her through a character rather than an event, idea, plot, or society. The story behind The Dispossessed first occurred to Le Guin through a vision, revealed as if seen from a distance, first as a male physicist, his thin face, clear eyes, large ears, possibly recalling a memory of Robert Oppenheimer, and a vivid personality.[34] She attempted to capture the character in a short story in what she recalled as one of her worst in 30 years of writing, in which the physicist escapes a gulag planet for a nearby wealthy sister planet, where he has a love affair but likes the planet even less, and so nobly returns to the gulag. She proceeded to rewrite the story, beginning with his name and origin—Shevek, from Utopia—which she considered reasonable based on his intelligence and disarming naivety. Knowing only bits of Thomas More (Utopia), William Morris (News from Nowhere), William Henry Hudson (A Crystal Age), and H. G. Wells (A Modern Utopia), Le Guin's reading of modern libertarian socialists rounded Shevek's prison planet into a place where she saw he would want to return: Marx and Engels, William Godwin, Emma Goldman, Paul Goodman and, foremost, Peter Kropotkin and Mary Shelley.[35]
Le Guin wrote The Dispossessed in 1973 for publication in May[36] or June 1974.[37]


## Critical reception
The novel received generally positive reviews. On the positive side, Baird Searles characterized the novel as an "extraordinary work", saying Le Guin had "created a working society in exquisite detail" and "a fully realized hypothetical culture [as well as] living breathing characters who are inevitable products of that culture".[38] Gerald Jonas, writing in The New York Times, said that "Le Guin's book, written in her solid, no-nonsense prose, is so persuasive that it ought to put a stop to the writing of prescriptive Utopias for at least 10 years".[39] Theodore Sturgeon praised The Dispossessed as "a beautifully written, beautifully composed book", saying "it performs one of [science fiction's] prime functions, which is to create another kind of social system to see how it would work. Or if it would work."[40]
Lester del Rey, however, gave the novel a mixed review, citing the quality of Le Guin's writing but claiming that the ending "slips badly", a deus ex machina that "destroy[s] much of the strength of the novel".[41]


## Awards


## Adaptations
In 1987, the CBC Radio anthology program Vanishing Point adapted The Dispossessed into a series of six 30 minute episodes.[42]
On October 5, 2021, it was announced that 1212 Entertainment and Anonymous Content would adapt the novel into a limited series.[43]


## Translations
Azerbaijani: Mülksüzlər, 2021
Bulgarian: Освободеният
Chinese (Simplified): 一无所有, 2009
Chinese (Traditional): 一無所有, 2005
Catalan: Els desposseïts, 2018
Croatian: Ljudi bez ičega, 2009
Czech: Vyděděnec, 1995
Danish: De udstødte : en socialistisk utopi, 1979
Dutch: De Ontheemde
Estonian: Ilmajäetud, 2018
Finnish: Osattomien planeetta, 1979
French: Les Dépossédés, 1975
Georgian: განპყრობილები, 2018
German: Planet der Habenichtse [de], 1976, later Die Enteigneten, 2006, later Freie Geister, 2017
Greek: Ο αναρχικός των δύο κόσμων
Hebrew: המנושל,‎ 1980; later בידיים ריקות,‎ 2015
Hungarian: A kisemmizettek, 1994
Italian: I reietti dell'altro pianeta, later Quelli di Anarres, 1976
Japanese: 所有せざる人々, 1980
Korean: 빼앗긴 자들, 2002
Persian: خلع‌شدگان, 2021
Polish: Wydziedziczeni
Portuguese: Os Despossuídos, Os Despojados
Romanian: Deposedaţii, 1995
Russian: Обездоленные, 1994, Обделённые, 1997
Serbian: Čovek praznih šaka, 1987
Spanish: Los desposeídos, 1983
Swedish: Shevek, 1976; De obesuttna, 2020
Turkish: Mülksüzler, 1990



## See also
Ursula K. Le Guin bibliography
Anarchism in the arts


## Notes
^ a b "Ursula K. Le Guin Awards". Science Fiction Awards Database. Locus Science Fiction Foundation. Retrieved September 24, 2021.
^ In The Word for World is Forest, a newly created ansible is brought to Athshe, a planet being settled by Earth-humans. In other tales in the Hainish Cycle, an ansible already exists. The word "ansible" was coined in Rocannon's World (first in order of publication but third in internal chronology), where it is central to the plot, and became an important concept throughout the realm of science fiction.
^ An allusion to the spiritual "Down by the Riverside"
^ “Introduction” from Ursula K. Le Guin: The Hainish Novels & Stories, Volume One, retrieved 9/8/2017
^ Spivack, Charlotte (1984). Ursula K. Le Guin. Boston: Twayne Publishers. ISBN 0805773932.
^ a b "Study Guide for Ursula LeGuin: The Dispossessed (1974)" - Paul Brians Archived 2005-11-07 at the Wayback Machine
^ Janet Biehl, Bookchin biographer; letter in UKL archive
^ Mathiesen.
^ Spivack, Charlotte (1984). Ursula K. Le Guin. Boston, MA: Twayne Publishers. pp. 74–75. ISBN 0-8057-7393-2.
^ Watson, Ian (March 1975). "Le Guin's Lathe of Heaven and the Role of Dick: The False Reality as Mediator". Science Fiction Studies # 5 = Volume 2, Part 1. Retrieved February 26, 2017.
^ Said by Shevek near the end of Chapter 13
^ Rigsby, Ellen M. (2005), p. 169
^ Le Guin, Ursula (August 30, 2017). ""Introduction" from Ursula K. Le Guin: The Hainish Novels & Stories, Volume One".
^ Le Guin, Ursula (1975). The Wind's Twelve Quarters. Bantam Books.
^ Elizabeth Stainforth and Jo Lindsay Walton. 2019. ‘Computing Utopia: The Horizons of Computational Economies in History and Science Fiction’. Science Fiction Studies 46 (3): 471–89. https://doi.org/10.5621/sciefictstud.46.3.0471.
^ Laurence, Davis and Peter G. Stillman. The New Utopian Politics of Ursula K. Le Guin's The Dispossessed, Lexington Books (2005). Pp. 287-298.
^ Conley, Tim and Stephen Cain. Encyclopedia of Fictional and Fantastic Languages. Greenwood Press, Westport (2006). Pp. 46-47.
^ Ursula K. Le Guin, The Dispossessed, p.69.
^ Burton (1985).
^ Davis and Stillman (2005).
^ Wimmer, Josh (August 29, 2010). "Book review discussing meanings". io9.
^ "Penn State University Press listing". JSTOR 20719930.
^ Bierman, Judah (1975). "Ambiguity in Utopia: The Dispossessed". Science Fiction Studies. 2 (3): 249–255. JSTOR 4238976.
^ Tom Moylan, Demand the Impossible: Science Fiction and the Utopian Imagination. Ed., Raffaella Baccolini. Bern: Peter Lang (2014), p. 87.
^ Tom Moylan, Demand the Impossible: Science Fiction and the Utopian Imagination. Ed., Raffaella Baccolini. Bern: Peter Lang (2014), p. 10.
^ a b Morrison, Mary Irene (2011). Anarcho-feminism and permanent revolution in Ursula K. Le Guin's 'The Dispossessed' (Thesis). State University of New York at Buffalo. ProQuest 878894517.
^ a b Marcellino, William (September 2009). "Shadows to Walk: Ursula Le Guin's Transgressions in Utopia". The Journal of American Culture. 32 (3): 203–213. doi:10.1111/j.1542-734X.2009.00711.x. ProQuest 200658410.
^ a b Lefanu, Sarah (2012). "Popular Writing and Feminist Intervention in Science Fiction". In Longhurst, Derek (ed.). Gender, Genre & Narrative Pleasure. Routledge. pp. 177–191. ISBN 978-1-136-32152-8.
^ "The Dispossessed". Samizdat (2015). December 20, 2015. Retrieved October 28, 2016.
^ Le Guin, Ursula. "Chapter 2". The Dispossessed. p. 44.
^ Barbour, Douglas. "Wholeness and Balance". Science Fiction Studies (1975). Retrieved October 27, 2016.
^ Tunik, Mark (January 2005). The Need for Walls: Privacy, Community, and Freedom in The Dispossessed. Lexington Books (2005). Retrieved October 27, 2016.
^ Grossi, Steve (February 2, 2013). "The Dispossessed". Steve Grossi (2013). Retrieved October 27, 2016.
^ Le Guin 1989, pp. 107–108.
^ Le Guin 1989, pp. 108–109.
^ Marrs, Cody; Hager, Christopher (2019). Timelines of American Literature. JHU Press. p. 103. ISBN 978-1-4214-2713-3.
^ Guin, Ursula K. Le (1979). The Language of the Night: Essays on Fantasy and Science Fiction. Ultramarine Publishing. p. 241. ISBN 978-0-399-50482-2.
^ "The Dispossessed: Visit from A Small Planet", Village Voice, November 21, 1974, pp.56, 58
^ "Of Things to Come", The New York Times Book Review, October 26, 1975
^ "Galaxy Bookshelf", Galaxy Science Fiction, June 1974, pp.97-98
^ "Reading Room", If, August 1974, pp.144-45
^ Times Past Old Time Radio Archives.
^ Otterson, Joe (October 5, 2021). "1212 Entertainment, Anonymous Content Team to Adapt Ursula K. Le Guin's 'The Dispossessed' as TV Series (EXCLUSIVE)". Variety. Retrieved January 17, 2022.


## Works cited
Le Guin, Ursula K. (1989). "Bibliographic Checklist of the Works of Ursula K. Le Guin". In Wood, Susan (ed.). The Language of the Night: Essays on Fantasy and Science Fiction (Revised ed.). New York: HarperCollins. pp. 240–249. ISBN 0-06-016835-8.


### Anarchism andThe Dispossessed
John P. Brennan, "Anarchism and Utopian Tradition in The Dispossessed", pp. 116–152, in Olander & Greenberg, editors, Ursula K. Le Guin, New York: Taplinger (1979).
Samuel R. Delany, "To Read The Dispossessed," in The Jewel-Hinged Jaw. N.Y.: Dragon Press, 1977, pp. 239–308 (anarchism in The Dispossessed). (pdf available online through Project MUSE)
Neil Easterbrook, "State, Heterotopia: The Political Imagination in Heinlein, Le Guin, and Delany", pp. 43–75, in Hassler & Wilcox, editors, Political Science Fiction, Columbia, SC: U of South Carolina Press (1997).
Leonard M. Fleck, "Science Fiction as a Tool of Speculative Philosophy: A Philosophic Analysis of Selected Anarchistic and Utopian Themes in Le Guin's The Dispossessed", pp. 133–45, in Remington, editor, Selected Proceedings of the 1978 Science Fiction Research Association National Conference, Cedar Falls: Univ. of Northern Iowa (1979).
Moore, John (Spring 1995). "An Archaeology of the Future: Ursula K. Le Guin and Anarcho-Primitivism". Foundation. 63: 32–39.
Elizabeth Stainforth and Jo Lindsay Walton. 2019. 'Computing Utopia: The Horizons of Computational Economies in History and Science Fiction'. Science Fiction Studies 46 (3): 471–89. https://doi.org/10.5621/sciefictstud.46.3.0471.
Larry L. Tifft, "Possessed Sociology and Le Guin's Dispossessed: From Exile to Anarchism", pp. 180–197, in De Bolt & Malzberg, editors, Voyager to Inner Lands and to Outer Space, Port Washington, NY: Kennikat (1979).
Kingsley Widmer, "The Dialectics of Utopianism: Le Guin's The Dispossessed", Liberal and Fine Arts Review, v.3, nos.1–2, pp. 1–11 (Jan.–July 1983).


### Gender andThe Dispossessed
Lillian M. Heldreth, "Speculations on Heterosexual Equality: Morris, McCaffrey, Le Guin", pp. 209–220 in Palumbo, ed., Erotic Universe: Sexuality and Fantastic Literature, Westport, CT: Greenwood (1986).
Neil Easterbrook, "State, Heterotopia: The Political Imagination in Heinlein, Le Guin, and Delany", pp. 43–75, in Hassler & Wilcox, editors, Political Science Fiction, Columbia, SC: U of South Carolina Press (1997).
Klarer, Mario (1992). "Gender and the 'Simultaneity Principle': Ursula Le Guin's 'The Dispossessed'". Mosaic: A Journal for the Interdisciplinary Study of Literature. 25 (2): 107–121. JSTOR 24780621.
Jim Villani, "The Woman Science Fiction Writer and the Non-Heroic Male Protagonist", pp. 21–30 in Hassler, ed., Patterns of the Fantastic, Mercer Island, WA: Starmont House (1983).


### Language andThe Dispossessed
Burton, Deirdre (January 1, 1985). "Linguistic innovation in feminist utopian fiction". Ilha do Desterro a Journal of English Language, Literatures in English and Cultural Studies (14): 082–106.


### Property and possessions
Werner Christie Mathiesen, "The Underestimation of Politics in Green Utopias: The Description of Politics in Huxley's Island, Le Guin's The Dispossessed, and Callenbach's Ecotopia", Utopian Studies: Journal of the Society for Utopian Studies, v.12, n.1, pp. 56–78 (2001).


### Science andThe Dispossessed
Ellen M. Rigsby, "Time and the Measure of the Political Animal." The New Utopian Politics of Ursula K. Le Guin's The Dispossessed. Ed., Laurence Davis and Peter Stillman. Lanham: Lexington books., 2005.


### Taoism andThe Dispossessed
Elizabeth Cummins Cogell, "Taoist Configurations: The Dispossessed", pp. 153–179 in De Bolt & Malzberg, editors, Ursula K. Le Guin: Voyager to Inner Lands and to Outer Space, Port Washington, NY: Kennikat (1979).


### Utopian literature andThe Dispossessed
James W. Bittner, "Chronosophy, Ethics, and Aesthetics in Le Guin's The Dispossessed: An Ambiguous Utopia, pp. 244–270 in Rabkin, Greenberg, and Olander, editors, No Place Else: Explorations in Utopian and Dystopian Fiction, Carbondale: Southern Illinois University Press (1983).
John P. Brennan, "Anarchism and Utopian Tradition in The Dispossessed", pp. 116–152, in Olander & Greenberg, editors, Ursula K. Le Guin, New York: Taplinger (1979).
Tom Moylan, Demand the Impossible: Science Fiction and the Utopian Imagination. Ed., Raffaella Baccolini. Bern: Peter Lang (2014). First published 1986.
Bülent Somay, "Towards an Open-Ended Utopia", Science-Fiction Studies, v.11, n.1 (#32), pp. 25–38 (March 1984).
Peter Fitting, "Positioning and Closure: On the 'Reading Effect' of Contemporary Utopian Fiction", Utopian Studies, v.1, pp. 23–36 (1987).
Kingsley Widmer, "The Dialectics of Utopianism: Le Guin's The Dispossessed", Liberal and Fine Arts Review, v.3, nos.1–2, pp. 1–11 (Jan.–July 1983).
L. Davis and P. Stillman, editors, "The new utopian politics of Ursula K. Le Guin's The Dispossessed", Lexington Books, (2005).
Carter F. Hanson, "Memory's Offspring and Utopian Ambiguity in Ursula K. Le Guin's 'The Day Before the Revolution' and The Dispossessed", Science Fiction Studies (2013)


### Additional references
Judah Bierman, "Ambiguity in Utopia: The Dispossessed", Science-Fiction Studies, v.2, pp. 249–255 (1975).
James F. Collins, "The High Points So Far: An Annotated Bibliography of Ursula K. LeGuin's The Left Hand of Darkness and The Dispossessed", Bulletin of Bibliography, v.58, no.2, pp. 89–100 (June 2001).
James P. Farrelly, "The Promised Land: Moses, Nearing, Skinner, and Le Guin", JGE: The Journal of General Education, v.33, n.1, pp. 15–23 (Spring 1981).


## External links
Full text of The Dispossessed at Libcom.org
The Dispossessed title listing at the Internet Speculative Fiction Database
Audio review and discussion of The Dispossessed at The Science Fiction Book Review Podcast
Readable maps of Anarres and Urras
The Dispossessed at Worlds Without End
CBC Radio Vanishing Point audio production of The Dispossessed at the Internet Archive: Part 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6
v
t
e
A Wizard of Earthsea (1968)
The Tombs of Atuan (1971)
The Farthest Shore (1972)
Tehanu (1990)
The Other Wind (2001)
"The Word of Unbinding" (1964)
"The Rule of Names" (1964)
"Firelight" (2018)
Tales from Earthsea (2001)
The Books of Earthsea (2018)
Earthsea (miniseries) (2004)
Tales from Earthsea (film) (2006)
Universe
Characters Ged
Ged
Earthsea Revisioned (1993)
Rocannon's World (1966)
Planet of Exile (1966)
City of Illusions (1967)
The Left Hand of Darkness (1969)
The Dispossessed (1974)
The Word for World Is Forest (1976)
Four Ways to Forgiveness (1995)
The Telling (2000)
"The Dowry of Angyar" (1964)
"Winter's King" (1969)
"Vaster than Empires and More Slow" (1971)
"The Day Before the Revolution" (1974)
The Shobies' Story (1990)
"The Matter of Seggri" (1994)
"A Man of the People"
"Coming of Age in Karhide" (1995)
"Old Music and the Slave Women" (1999)
Ansible
Gifts (2004)
Voices (2006)
Powers (2007)
The Lathe of Heaven (1971)
Very Far Away from Anywhere Else (1976)
The Eye of the Heron (1978)
Malafrena (1979)
The Beginning Place (1980)
Always Coming Home (1985)
Lavinia (2008)
"The Ones Who Walk Away from Omelas" (1973)
"The Diary of the Rose" (1976)
"The Wife's Story" (1982)
"Paradises Lost" (2002)
The Wind's Twelve Quarters (1975)
Orsinian Tales (1976)
The Compass Rose (1982)
Buffalo Gals and Other Animal Presences (1987)
A Fisherman of the Inland Sea (1994)
Unlocking the Air and Other Stories (1996)
The Birthday of the World (2002)
Changing Planes (2003)
Catwings (series) (1988–1999)
Cat Dreams
The Language of the Night (1979)
Dancing at the Edge of the World (1982)
Steering the Craft (1998)
v
t
e
The Sword in the Stone by T. H. White (1939)
Slan by A. E. van Vogt (1941)
Beyond This Horizon by Anson MacDonald (1943)
Conjure Wife by Fritz Leiber (1944)
Shadow Over Mars by Leigh Brackett (1945)
The Mule by Isaac Asimov (1946)
Farmer in the Sky by Robert A. Heinlein (1951)
Fahrenheit 451 by Ray Bradbury (1954)
The Demolished Man by Alfred Bester (1953)
They'd Rather Be Right (aka: The Forever Machine) by Mark Clifton and Frank Riley (1955)
Double Star by Robert A. Heinlein (1956)
The Big Time by Fritz Leiber (1958)
A Case of Conscience by James Blish (1959)
Starship Troopers by Robert A. Heinlein (1960)
A Canticle for Leibowitz by Walter M. Miller, Jr. (1961)
Stranger in a Strange Land by Robert A. Heinlein (1962)
The Man in the High Castle by Philip K. Dick (1963)
Here Gather the Stars (aka: Way Station) by Clifford D. Simak (1964)
The Wanderer by Fritz Leiber (1965)
Dune by Frank Herbert / ...And Call Me Conrad (aka: This Immortal) by Roger Zelazny (1966)
The Moon Is a Harsh Mistress by Robert A. Heinlein (1967)
Lord of Light by Roger Zelazny (1968)
Stand on Zanzibar by John Brunner (1969)
The Left Hand of Darkness by Ursula K. Le Guin (1970)
Ringworld by Larry Niven (1971)
To Your Scattered Bodies Go by Philip José Farmer (1972)
The Gods Themselves by Isaac Asimov (1973)
Rendezvous with Rama by Arthur C. Clarke (1974)
The Dispossessed by Ursula K. Le Guin (1975)
The Forever War by Joe Haldeman (1976)
Where Late the Sweet Birds Sang by Kate Wilhelm (1977)
Gateway by Frederik Pohl (1978)
Dreamsnake by Vonda N. McIntyre (1979)
The Fountains of Paradise by Arthur C. Clarke (1980)
The Snow Queen by Joan D. Vinge (1981)
Downbelow Station by C. J. Cherryh (1982)
Foundation's Edge by Isaac Asimov (1983)
Startide Rising by David Brin (1984)
Neuromancer by William Gibson (1985)
Ender's Game by Orson Scott Card (1986)
Speaker for the Dead by Orson Scott Card (1987)
The Uplift War by David Brin (1988)
Cyteen by C. J. Cherryh (1989)
Hyperion by Dan Simmons (1990)
The Vor Game by Lois McMaster Bujold (1991)
Barrayar by Lois McMaster Bujold (1992)
A Fire Upon the Deep by Vernor Vinge / Doomsday Book by Connie Willis (1993)
Green Mars by Kim Stanley Robinson (1994)
Mirror Dance by Lois McMaster Bujold (1995)
The Diamond Age by Neal Stephenson (1996)
Blue Mars by Kim Stanley Robinson (1997)
Forever Peace by Joe Haldeman (1998)
To Say Nothing of the Dog by Connie Willis (1999)
A Deepness in the Sky by Vernor Vinge (2000)
Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire by J. K. Rowling (2001)
American Gods by Neil Gaiman (2002)
Hominids by Robert J. Sawyer (2003)
Paladin of Souls by Lois McMaster Bujold (2004)
Jonathan Strange & Mr Norrell by Susanna Clarke (2005)
Spin by Robert Charles Wilson (2006)
Rainbows End by Vernor Vinge (2007)
The Yiddish Policemen's Union by Michael Chabon (2008)
The Graveyard Book by Neil Gaiman (2009)
The Windup Girl by Paolo Bacigalupi / The City & the City by China Miéville (2010)
Blackout/All Clear by Connie Willis (2011)
Among Others by Jo Walton (2012)
Redshirts by John Scalzi (2013)
Ancillary Justice by Ann Leckie (2014)
The Three-Body Problem by Cixin Liu, translated by Ken Liu (2015)
The Fifth Season by N. K. Jemisin (2016)
The Obelisk Gate by N. K. Jemisin (2017)
The Stone Sky by N. K. Jemisin (2018)
The Calculating Stars by Mary Robinette Kowal (2019)
A Memory Called Empire by Arkady Martine (2020)
Network Effect by Martha Wells (2021)
A Desolation Called Peace by Arkady Martine (2022)
Nettle & Bone by T. Kingfisher (2023)
Some Desperate Glory by Emily Tesh (2024)
v
t
e
Ringworld by Larry Niven (1971)
The Lathe of Heaven by Ursula K. Le Guin (1972)
The Gods Themselves by Isaac Asimov (1973)
Rendezvous with Rama by Arthur C. Clarke (1974)
The Dispossessed by Ursula K. Le Guin (1975)
The Forever War by Joe Haldeman (1976)
Where Late the Sweet Birds Sang by Kate Wilhelm (1977)
Gateway by Frederik Pohl (1978)
Dreamsnake by Vonda N. McIntyre (1979)
Titan by John Varley (1980)
The Snow Queen by Joan D. Vinge (1981)
Best Novel (1971–1981)
Best SF Novel (1980–present)
Best Fantasy Novel (1978–present)
Best First Novel (1981–present)
Best Horror Novel (1989–1997, 1999, 2017–present)
Best Young Adult Book (2003–present)
Best Novella (1973–present)
Best Novelette (1975–present)
Best Short Story (1971–present)
v
t
e
Dune by Frank Herbert (1966)
Babel-17 by Samuel R. Delany / Flowers for Algernon by Daniel Keyes (1967)
The Einstein Intersection by Samuel R. Delany (1968)
Rite of Passage by Alexei Panshin (1969)
The Left Hand of Darkness by Ursula K. Le Guin (1970)
Ringworld by Larry Niven (1971)
A Time of Changes by Robert Silverberg (1972)
The Gods Themselves by Isaac Asimov (1973)
Rendezvous with Rama by Arthur C. Clarke (1974)
The Dispossessed by Ursula K. Le Guin (1975)
The Forever War by Joe Haldeman (1976)
Man Plus by Frederik Pohl (1977)
Gateway by Frederik Pohl (1978)
Dreamsnake by Vonda N. McIntyre (1979)
The Fountains of Paradise by Arthur C. Clarke (1980)
Timescape by Gregory Benford (1981)
The Claw of the Conciliator by Gene Wolfe (1982)
No Enemy But Time by Michael Bishop (1983)
Startide Rising by David Brin (1984)
Neuromancer by William Gibson (1985)
Ender's Game by Orson Scott Card (1986)
Speaker for the Dead by Orson Scott Card (1987)
The Falling Woman by Pat Murphy (1988)
Falling Free by Lois McMaster Bujold (1989)
The Healer's War by Elizabeth Ann Scarborough (1990)
Tehanu: The Last Book of Earthsea by Ursula K. Le Guin (1991)
Stations of the Tide by Michael Swanwick (1992)
Doomsday Book by Connie Willis (1993)
Red Mars by Kim Stanley Robinson (1994)
Moving Mars by Greg Bear (1995)
The Terminal Experiment by Robert J. Sawyer (1996)
Slow River by Nicola Griffith (1997)
The Moon and the Sun by Vonda N. McIntyre (1998)
Forever Peace by Joe Haldeman (1999)
Parable of the Talents by Octavia E. Butler (2000)
Darwin's Radio by Greg Bear (2001)
The Quantum Rose by Catherine Asaro (2002)
American Gods by Neil Gaiman (2003)
Speed of Dark by Elizabeth Moon (2004)
Paladin of Souls by Lois McMaster Bujold (2005)
Camouflage by Joe Haldeman (2006)
Seeker by Jack McDevitt (2007)
The Yiddish Policemen's Union by Michael Chabon (2008)
Powers by Ursula K. Le Guin (2009)
The Windup Girl by Paolo Bacigalupi (2010)
Blackout/All Clear by Connie Willis (2011)
Among Others by Jo Walton (2012)
2312 by Kim Stanley Robinson (2013)
Ancillary Justice by Ann Leckie (2014)
Annihilation by Jeff VanderMeer (2015)
Uprooted by Naomi Novik (2016)
All the Birds in the Sky by Charlie Jane Anders (2017)
The Stone Sky by N. K. Jemisin (2018)
The Calculating Stars by Mary Robinette Kowal (2019)
A Song for a New Day by Sarah Pinsker (2020)
Network Effect by Martha Wells (2021)
A Master of Djinn by P. Djèlí Clark (2022)
Babel, or the Necessity of Violence by R. F. Kuang (2023)
The Saint of Bright Doors by Vajra Chandrasekera (2024)
Someone You Can Build a Nest In by John Wiswell (2025)
v
t
e
Christine de Pizan (1364–1430)
Margaret Cavendish (1623–1673)
Marie-Anne Robert (1705–1771)
Mary Griffith (1772–1846)
Mary Shelley (1797–1851)
Jane Wells Webb Loudon (1807–1858)
Annie Denton Cridge (1825–1875)
Rhoda Broughton (1840–1920)
Bertha von Suttner (1843–1914)
Mary E. Bradley Lane (1844–1930)
Elizabeth Burgoyne Corbett (1846–1930)
Auguste Groner (1850–1929)
Renée Marie Gouraud d'Ablancourt (1853–1941)
Irene Clyde (1869–1954)
Charlotte Perkins Gilman (1860–1935)
Inez Haynes Irwin (1873–1970)
Rokeya Sakhawat Hussain (1880–1932)
Rosa Rosà (1884—1978)
Miriam Allen DeFord (1888–1975)
Aurora Bertrana (1892—1974)
Anna Banti (1895—1985)
L. Taylor Hansen (1897–1976)
Karin Boye (1900—1941)
Stella Gibbons (1902–1989)
Leslie F. Stone (1905–1991)
C. L. Moore (1911–1987)
James Tiptree Jr. (1915—1987)
Alice Eleanor Jones (1916–1981)
Shirley Jackson (1916–1965)
Elisabeth Mann-Borgese (1918—2002)
Madeleine L'Engle (1918–2007)
Doris Lessing (1919–2013)
Marlen Haushofer (1920–1970)
Françoise d'Eaubonne (1920–2005)
Carol Emshwiller (1921–2019)
Virginia Kidd (1921—2003)
Judith Merril (1923–1997)
Kate Wilhelm (1928—2018)
Sonya Dorman (1924–2005)
Angélica Gorodischer (1928–2022)
Ursula K. Le Guin (1929–2018)
Sheri S. Tepper (1929—2016)
Sally Miller Gearhart (1931—2021)
Fay Weldon (1931—2023)
Nancy Bogen b. 1932
Sophie Behr (b. 1935)
Marge Piercy (b. 1936)
Joanna Russ (1937–2011)
Margaret Atwood (b. 1939)
Suzy McKee Charnas (1939–2023)
Jutta Heinrich (1940–2021)
Gerd Brantenberg (b. 1941)
Chelsea Quinn Yarbro (b. 1942)
Eleanor Arnason (b. 1942)
Samuel R. Delany (b. 1942)
Donna Haraway (b. 1944)
Rachel Pollack (1945–2023)
Elizabeth A. Lynn (b. 1946)
Octavia E. Butler (1947–2006)
Joëlle Wintrebert (b. 1949)
Lois McMaster Bujold (b. 1949 )
Dubravka Ugrešić (b. 1949)
Roz Kaveney (b. 1949)
Karen Joy Fowler (b. 1950)
L. Timmel Duchamp (b. 1950)
Charlotte Kerner (b. 1950)
Leigh Kennedy (b. 1951)
Stéphanie Nicot (b. 1952)
Marleen S. Barr (b. 1953)
Pat Murphy (b. 1955)
Ellen Kushner (b. 1955)
Montse Watkins (1955–2000)
Joan Slonczewski (b. 1956)
Mary Gentle (b. 1956)
Laura J. Mixon (b. 1957)
Luce Basseterre [fr] (b. 1957)
Rieko Matsuura (b. 1958)
Ninni Holmqvist (b. 1958)
Mari Kotani (b. 1958)
Ïan Larue (b. 1958)
Nicoletta Vallorani (b. 1958)
Maureen F. McHugh (b. 1959)
Lucie Chenu (b. 1960)
Neil Gaiman (b. 1960)
Melissa Scott (b. 1960)
Nalo Hopkinson (b. 1960)
Nicola Griffith (b. 1960)
Gabriela Bustelo (b. 1962)
Lola Robles (b. 1963)
Hiroe Suga (b. 1963)
Jo Walton (b. 1964)
Heidrun Jänchen (b. 1964)
Tananarive Due (b. 1966)
Catherine Dufour (b. 1966)
Ann Leckie (b. 1966)
Virginia Bergin (b. 1966)
Justine Larbalestier (b. 1967)
Kelly Robson (b. 1967)
Yumiko Shirai (b. 1967)
Sara Doke (b. 1968)
Annalee Newitz (b. 1969)
Charlie Jane Anders (b. 1969)
Lisa Yaszek (b. 1969)
Barbara Kirchner [fr] (b. 1970)
Kelly Sue DeConnick (b. 1970)
Li-Cam (b. 1970)
Fumi Yoshinaga (b. 1971)
N. K. Jemisin (b. 1972)
Sheree R. Thomas (b. 1972)
Naomi Novik (b. 1973)
Kiini Ibura Salaam (b. 1973)
Sabrina Calvo (b. 1974)
Juli Zeh (b. 1974)
Nnedi Okorafor (b. 1974)
Catherynne M. Valente (b. 1979)
Kameron Hurley (b. 1980)
Judith C. Vogt (b. 1981)
Nghi Vo (b. 1981)
Tang Fei (b. 1983)
Amal El-Mohtar (b. 1984)
Hao Jingfang (b. 1984)
Theresa Hannig (b. 1984)
Becky Chambers (b. 1985)
Tamsyn Muir (b. 1985)
Aline Valek (b. 1986)
Akwaeke Emezi (b. 1987)
Nadia Chonville (b. 1989)
Floriane Soulas (b. 1989)
Xiran Jay Zhao (b. 1997)
Benjanun Sriduangkaew (b. ?)
Vandana Singh (b. ?)
The Book of the City of Ladies (1405)
The Blazing World (1666)
The Voyages of Lord Seaton to the Seven Planets (1765)
Frankenstein (1818)
Man's Rights; Or, How Would You Like It? (1870)
Mizora (1880)
New Amazonia: A Foretaste of the Future (1889)
Iola Leroy (1892)
Unveiling a Parallel (1893)
Arqtiq (1899)
NEQUA or The Problem of the Ages (1900)
Sultana's Dream (1905)
Beatrice the Sixteenth (1909)
Moving the Mountain (1911)
Angel Island (1914)
Herland (1915)
"Shambleau" (1933)
"That Only a Mother" (1948)
A Wrinkle in Time (1962)
Memoirs of a Spacewoman (1962)
"When I Was Miss Dow" (1966)
"Aye, and Gomorrah" (1967)
The Left Hand of Darkness (1969)
And Chaos Died (1970)
The Kin of Ata Are Waiting for You (1971)
The Word for World is Forest (1972)
"When It Changed" (1972)
Ten Thousand Light-Years from Home (1973)
"The Women Men Don't See" (1973)
The Dispossessed (1974)
"The Girl Who Was Plugged In" (1974)
The Holdfast Chronicles (1974–1999)
The Female Man (1975)
Woman on the Edge of Time (1976)
Houston, Houston, Do You Read? (1976)
The Female Man (1977)
Egalia's Daughters (1977)
Up the Walls of the World (1978)
The Eye of the Heron (1978)
Star Songs of an Old Primate (1978)
Kindred (1979)
The Marriages Between Zones Three, Four and Five (1980)
The Vampire Tapestry (1980)
"Souls" (1982)
Native Tongue (1984)
The Handmaid's Tale (1985)
Brightness Falls from the Air (1985)
A Door into Ocean (1986)
Golden Days (1987)
Lilith's Brood (1987)
"Rachel in Love" (1987)
The Gate to Women's Country (1988)
Her Smoke Rose Up Forever (1990)
Beauty (1991)
He, She and It (1991)
Chroniques du pays des mères (1992)
"The Matter of Seggri" (1993)
Parable of the Sower (1993)
The Fifth Sacred Thing (1993)
Brown Girl in the Ring (1998)
The Fresco (2000)
Tales from Earthsea (2001)
Ōoku: The Inner Chambers (2004–2020)
Bu Bu Jing Xin (2005)
Fledgling (2005)
Le Goût de l'immortalité (2005)
Choir Boy (2005)
Wombs (2009–2016)
The Hundred Thousand Kingdoms (2010)
Who Fears Death (2010)
Lavinia (2008)
The Alchemy of Stone (2008)
The Method (2009)
"Six Months, Three Days" (2011)
Ancillary Justice (2013)
The Automation (2014)
The Fifth Season (2015)
Binti (2015)
The Obelisk Gate (2016)
All the Birds in the Sky (2018)
This Is How You Lose the Time War (2019)
The Empress of Salt and Fortune (2020)
When the Tiger Came Down the Mountain (2020)
The Future of Another Timeline (2021)
Victories Greater Than Death (2021)
Dreams Bigger Than Heartbreak (2022)
The Memory Librarian: And Other Stories of Dirty Computer (2022)
The Daughter of Doctor Moreau (2022)
Promises Stronger Than Darkness (2023)
Cyborg
Feminist science fiction
Gender in speculative fiction
Single-gender world
Women in speculative fiction
Láadan (1982)
Women of Wonder (1975)
Aurora: Beyond Equality (1976)
The Language of the Night (1979)
More Women of Wonder (1979)
How to Suppress Women's Writing (1983)
"A Cyborg Manifesto" (1984)
To Write Like a Woman (1995)
"We Have Always Fought" (2013)
The Geek Feminist Revolution (2016)
Dark Matter: A Century of Speculative Fiction from the African Diaspora (2000)
L'Oiselle (1909)
Jirel of Joiry (1934)
Aqueduct Press
Launch Point Press
Onlywomen Press
Regal Crest Enterprises
Zubaan Books
Forerunner
The Witch and the Chameleon
Janus
Bitch Planet
Sense of Gender Awards
Otherwise Award
Lambda Literary Award
Wiscon
Sad Puppies (2013–2017)
Anarchism
Novels
LGBTQ
Speculative fiction
VIAF
Germany
United States
France
BnF data
Israel
IdRef


URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Inverted_World
Content:

Inverted World (The Inverted World in some editions) is a 1974 science fiction novel by British writer Christopher Priest (1943–2024). The novel's basic premise was first used in the short story "The Inverted World" included in New Writings in SF 22 (1973), which had different characters and plot. In 2010, the novel was included in the SF Masterworks collection.
In the novel, an entire city and its residents travel slowly across a supposedly alien planet on railway tracks. The city's engineers lay track ahead of the city, reusing old track the city has crossed over. Many people are unaware that the city is even moving. A crisis ensues as its population decreases, the people grow unruly, and an obstacle looms ahead.


## Plot
The book consists of a prologue and five parts. The first, third and fifth sections are narrated in the first person by the protagonist, Helward Mann; the second follows Helward, but is written in the third person; while the prologue and fourth part center on Elizabeth Khan, also from the third person perspective.
Helward lives in a city called "Earth", which is slowly being winched along at an average speed of 0.1 miles per day (0.16 km per day) on four railroad tracks northward toward an ever-moving, mysterious "optimum". The city, which Helward estimates is 1,500 feet (460 m) long and no more than 200 feet (61 m) high, is not on the planet Earth; the sun is disc shaped, with two spikes extending above and below its center. The city's inhabitants live in the hope of rescue from their lost home world.
Upon reaching adulthood at the age of "six hundred and fifty miles", Helward leaves the crèche in which he has been raised and becomes an apprentice Future Surveyor. His guild surveys the land ahead, choosing the best route. The Track Guild tears up the track south of the city to re-lay in the north. Traction is responsible for moving the city, while the Bridge-Builders overcome terrain obstacles. The Barter Guild recruits labourers ("tooks") from the primitive, poverty-stricken nearby villages they pass, as well as women brought temporarily into the city to help combat the puzzling shortfall of female babies. The Militia provides protection, armed with crossbows, against tooks resentful of the city's hard bargaining and the taking of their women.
Only guildsmen (all male) have access to the outside world and are oath-bound to keep what they know a secret; in fact, most people do not even know the city moves. Helward's wife Victoria becomes somewhat resentful when he is reluctant to answer questions about his work.
The purpose and organisation of the city is laid out in a document written by the founder: Destaine's Directive, with entries dating from 1987 to 2023. Helward reads it, but it does not satisfy his curiosity as to what the optimum is or why the city continually tries to reach it.
When Helward is assigned to escort three women back south to their village, he is astonished by what he learns about the alien nature of the world. As they go further south, the women's bodies become shorter and wider, and they begin to speak faster and in a higher pitch. The terrain itself becomes similarly squashed; mountains now look like hills to Helward. One woman has a male baby who, like Helward, does not change shape. Most frightening of all, the guildsman feels an ever-growing force pulling him southward. Abandoning the women, with whom he now cannot even communicate, he returns to the city. There he finds that time runs at a different rate in the south. In the city, several years have passed, during which the tooks have attacked and killed many children, including Helward's son. Victoria had given him up for lost and remarried. When Helward goes to survey the land ahead, he discovers that time passes more quickly in the north.
While returning from a negotiation at a settlement, he is followed by Elizabeth Khan, herself a relative newcomer to the village. They talk for a while. When they meet again, she mentions she came from England several months before. He becomes excited, thinking that rescue is finally at hand. She is unable to convince him that they are on Earth. Intrigued, she replaces one of the village women and enters the city, which to her looks like no more than a misshapen office block. Once again, she encounters Helward. Having learned about the city, she leaves to apprise her superiors and to do some research.
Two crises strike. After the took attack, it was decided to educate the residents about their situation. This, however, had an unintended effect. Dissidents called the Terminators want to stop moving the city, and are willing to resort to sabotage to achieve their goal. Victoria is one of their leaders. A more imminent problem is a large, unavoidable body of water ahead with no opposite bank visible. Both dilemmas are resolved at a meeting.
Elizabeth explains to the citizens their true situation. A global energy crisis (the "Crash") had devastated civilisation, a disaster from which the world is only gradually emerging. Destaine was a British particle physicist who had discovered a new way to generate power, but nobody took him seriously. The process required a natural component to work. Destaine found one such in China: the optimum. He went there to set up a test generator and was never heard of again. His invention has serious permanent and hereditary side effects, distorting people's perceptions (for example the shape of the sun) and damaging their DNA so that fewer females are born. After nearly two centuries, the city has reached the coast of Portugal, with only the Atlantic Ocean ahead. Most of the residents are convinced, but to Elizabeth's disappointment, Helward refuses to give up his beliefs.


## Critical response
The opening sentence of this novel, "I had reached the age of six hundred and fifty miles," has generated comments by many readers. Critic Paul Kincaid writes that "it has justly become one of the most famous in science fiction."[1] James Timarco says similarly,
"From the first sentence, 'I had reached the age of 650 miles,' readers are aware that something is deeply wrong about this world. We know it has something to do with the relationship between space and time, but beyond this we can only guess."[2]
Nick Owchar, in the Los Angeles Times, writes that a "reason for the story's appeal is the way in which Priest, with the novel's very first sentence, immerses us within a strange new reality ... Mann's proud declaration about his maturity is a jarring revelation – time in this world is measured best by distances."[3]
Kincaid, calling the novel "one of the key works of postwar British science fiction," writes,
"The inverted world is one of the few truly original ideas to have been developed in contemporary science fiction. ... In a devastatingly effective coup de théâtre, Priest produces a final revelation that twists everything that has gone before."[1]
Peter Nicholls and John Clute write in The Encyclopedia of Science Fiction, that the novel
"marked the climax of his career as a writer whose [earlier] work resembled genre SF, and remains one of the two or three most impressive pure-SF novels produced in the United Kingdom since World War II; the tractricoid world on which the action takes place is perhaps the strangest planet invented since Mesklin".[a]
Nicholls & Clute write that the story, dealing with paradoxes of perception and "conceptual breakthrough"[b] "is a striking addition to that branch of SF which deals with the old theme of appearance-versus-reality".[4]
Timarco's review discusses the psychology of the characters and the impact on the reader:
What makes Inverted World shine like no other book is that it illustrates so perfectly how human beings create the context for their own suffering, yet this explanation never dulls the agony of Helward's predicament. And while Helward's story is tragic, the underlying narrative is hopeful.

We create the chains that bind us, so therefore it must be possible for us to cast them off. But if we could do this, help one another to do it, would we know what to do when we got free?[2]
Owchar, comparing the setting with other bizarre creations by authors such as Alan Campbell and China Miéville, wonders,
Why do these fragile worlds captivate us so?

Is it because they jab at our assumptions that the modern city is entirely secure? Is it because we feel too safe just because there's concrete beneath our feet – even though concrete can wobble like rubber as it did during July's Chino Hills temblor?

Long before these philosophical considerations arise, Priest's story is fascinating for a basic, practical reason: How, indeed, does one move a city? Much of the first half of the book is devoted to describing this extraordinary process, something suggestive of the building of the Pyramids or the laying of the Transcontinental Railroad.[3]
Kirkus Reviews wrote,
"The unwinding of this SF mystery is highly satisfactory, but the clever resolution is slightly deus ex futuristic machina."[5]


## Awards
In 1974 The Inverted World was the winner of the British Science Fiction Association (BSFA),[6] and in 1975 it was nominated for the Hugo Award.[7]


## Parody continuation
The Making of The Lesbian Horse is a short chapbook (1979) written by Priest as a parody continuation of the book.


## Footnotes
^ Mesklin is the name of an oblate planet with extremely high mass which is the setting for Hal Clement's 1954 novel Mission of Gravity.
^ The Encyclopedia of Science Fiction[4] rates conceptual breakthrough as a key element in science fiction.


## References
^ a b Kincaid, Paul (2002). "Inverted World". In Kelleghan, Fiona (ed.). Classics of Science Fiction and Fantasy Literature. Vol. 1: Aegypt – Make Room! Make Room!. Pasadena, California: Salem Press. pp. 294–296. ISBN 1-58765-051-7.
^ a b Timarco, James (October 2008). "Inverted World by Christopher Priest". Fantasy Magazine (book review). Retrieved 21 September 2012.
^ a b Owchar, Nick (10 August 2008). "Christopher Priest's Inverted World imagines a city that crawls". The Los Angeles Times (book review). Los Angeles, CA. Retrieved 21 September 2012.
^ a b Clute, John; Nicholls, Peter (1995). "Priest, Christopher". The Encyclopedia of Science Fiction. New York, NY: St Martin's Griffin. p. 960. ISBN 0-312-09618-6.
^ "The Inverted World". Kirkus Reviews (book review). 1974. Retrieved 21 September 2012.
^ "1974 Award Winners & Nominees". Worlds Without End. Retrieved 15 June 2010.
^ "1975 Award Winners & Nominees". Worlds Without End. Retrieved 15 June 2010.


## External links
Inverted World title listing at the Internet Speculative Fiction Database
Christopher Priest's website
The Inverted World at Worlds Without End
v
t
e
Stand on Zanzibar by John Brunner (1969)
The Jagged Orbit by John Brunner (1970)
Rendezvous with Rama by Arthur C. Clarke (1973)
Inverted World by Christopher Priest (1974)
Orbitsville by Bob Shaw (1975)
Brontomek! by Michael G. Coney (1976)
The Jonah Kit by Ian Watson (1977)
A Scanner Darkly by Philip K. Dick (1978)
The Unlimited Dream Company by J. G. Ballard (1979)
Timescape by Gregory Benford (1980)
The Shadow of the Torturer by Gene Wolfe (1981)
Helliconia Spring by Brian W. Aldiss (1982)
Tik-Tok by John Sladek (1983)
Mythago Wood by Robert Holdstock (1984)
Helliconia Winter by Brian W. Aldiss (1985)
The Ragged Astronauts by Bob Shaw (1986)
Gráinne by Keith Roberts (1987)
Lavondyss by Robert Holdstock (1988)
Pyramids by Terry Pratchett (1989)
Take Back Plenty by Colin Greenland (1990)
The Fall of Hyperion by Dan Simmons (1991)
Red Mars by Kim Stanley Robinson (1992)
Aztec Century by Christopher Evans (1993)
Feersum Endjinn by Iain M. Banks (1994)
The Time Ships by Stephen Baxter (1995)
Excession by Iain M. Banks (1996)
The Sparrow by Mary Doria Russell (1997)
The Extremes by Christopher Priest (1998)
The Sky Road by Ken MacLeod (1999)
Ash: A Secret History by Mary Gentle (2000)
Chasm City by Alastair Reynolds (2001)
The Separation by Christopher Priest (2002)
Felaheen by Jon Courtenay Grimwood (2003)
River of Gods by Ian McDonald (2004)
Air by Geoff Ryman (2005)
End of the World Blues by Jon Courtenay Grimwood (2006)
Brasyl by Ian McDonald (2007)
The Night Sessions by Ken MacLeod (2008)
The City & the City by China Miéville (2009)
The Dervish House by Ian McDonald (2010)
The Islanders by Christopher Priest (2011)
Jack Glass by Adam Roberts (2012)
Ancillary Justice by Ann Leckie and Ack-Ack Macaque by Gareth L. Powell (tie) (2013)
Ancillary Sword by Ann Leckie (2014)
The House of Shattered Wings by Aliette de Bodard (2015)
Europe in Winter by Dave Hutchinson (2016)
The Rift by Nina Allan (2017)
Embers of War by Gareth L. Powell (2018)
Children of Ruin by Adrian Tchaikovsky (2019)
The City We Became by N. K. Jemisin (2020)
Shards of Earth by Adrian Tchaikovsky (2021)
City of Last Chances by Adrian Tchaikovsky (2022)
The Green Man’s Quarry by Juliet E. McKenna (2023)
Three Eight One by Aliya Whiteley (2024)
v
t
e
Fugue for a Darkening Island
Inverted World
The Space Machine
A Dream of Wessex
An Infinite Summer
The Affirmation
The Glamour
The Prestige
The Extremes
The Separation
The Islanders


URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/High-Rise_(novel)
Content:

High-Rise is a 1975 novel by British writer J. G. Ballard.[1] The story describes the disintegration of a luxury high-rise building as its affluent residents gradually descend into violent chaos. As with Ballard's previous novels Crash (1973) and Concrete Island (1974), High-Rise inquires into the ways in which modern social and technological landscapes could alter the human psyche in provocative and hitherto unexplored ways. It was adapted into a film of the same name, in 2015, by director Ben Wheatley.


## Plot
Following his divorce, doctor and medical-school lecturer Robert Laing moves into his new apartment on the 25th floor of a recently completed high-rise building on the outskirts of London. This tower block provides its affluent tenants all the conveniences and commodities that modern life has to offer: a supermarket, bank, restaurant, hair salon, swimming pools, a gymnasium, its own school, and high-speed lifts. Its cutting-edge amenities allow the occupants to gradually become uninterested in the outside world, providing them with accommodation and a secure environment.
Laing meets fellow tenants Charlotte Melville, a secretary who lives one floor above him, and Richard Wilder, a documentary film-maker who lives with his family on the building's lower floors. Life in the high-rise begins to degenerate quickly, as minor power failures and petty grievances among neighbours and between rival floors escalate into an orgy of violence. Skirmishes become frequent throughout the building as whole floors of tenants try to claim lifts and hold them for their own. Groups gather to defend their rights to the swimming pools, and party-goers attack "enemy floors" to raid and vandalise them. The lower, middle, and upper floors of the building gradually stratify into distinct groups.
It does not take long for the occupants to ignore social restraints, abandoning life outside the building and devoting their time to the escalation of violence inside; people quit their jobs, and families stay indoors permanently, losing all sense of time. As the amenities of the high-rise break down and bodies begin to pile up, no one considers leaving or alerting the authorities, instead exploring the newly-found urges and desires engendered by the building's disintegration. As Laing navigates the new environment, Wilder sets out to reach floor 40—the top of the building—and finally confront the building's architect, Anthony Royal.


## Legacy
High-Rise was known to be among Joy Division singer Ian Curtis's favourite books.[2] The book has been cited as an influence upon the 1987 Doctor Who serial Paradise Towers.[3] Hawkwind used the book as the basis for a song of the same name on their 1979 album PXR5.[4][5]
Some critics have pointed out the thematic similarities between the novel and Canadian filmmaker David Cronenberg's early film Shivers, a.k.a. They Came from Within (1975). Aside from the fact that they both came out the same year, both the book and the film tell a story in which the tenants of a humongous, isolated hi-tech residential building wind up descending into an anarchic orgy of sex and violence. Although lacking in formal precision and narrative tightness, compared to Cronenberg's later, more mature films, it has been suggested that this is a truer (yet serendipitous) adaptation of the novel than Ben Wheatley's 2015 version. Cronenberg later undertook the challenging project of adapting into film Ballard's debut novel, Crash (1973), —a novel considered unfilmable up until then— about a subculture of people who fetishise car accidents. The 1996 film version stars James Spader, Holly Hunter and Elias Koteas.[6]
In a lecture on J. G. Ballard with John Gray, Will Self represented Withnail and I director Bruce Robinson's interpretation of the story which has "the unconscious, the car park of the building, penetrating the ego in the conquest of the super ego in the top of the building." He then stated that Ballard would have hated that interpretation, with Self preferring instead the interpretation that "Freudian ideas swirl and fail to coalesce," as they are "appropriated by individual mythomanes without actually reflecting an external reality."[7]
Canadian post-rock band Godspeed You! Black Emperor listed it on their recommended reading list to coincide with their appearance at and curation of the All Tomorrow's Parties festival in 2010.[8]


## Artwork
The cover of the novel's first edition shows a high rise in Berlin's Hansaviertel designed by the German architect Hans Schwippert.


## Film adaptation
For over 30 years, British producer Jeremy Thomas had wanted to do a film version of the book. It was nearly made in the late 1970s, with Nicolas Roeg directing from a script by Paul Mayersberg. Later attempts with Canadian film-maker Vincenzo Natali attached to write and direct also failed,[9][10] before the film adaptation was finally made in 2014.
With Jeremy Thomas producing, Ben Wheatley directing from a script by Amy Jump, and Tom Hiddleston starring in the lead role, [11][12] the film had its world première at the Toronto International Film Festival on September 13, 2015, and was widely released in early 2016.


## References
^ J. G. Ballard; James Goddard (1976). J. G. Ballard, the First Twenty Years. Bran's Head Books Limited. p. 89. ISBN 9780905220031.
^ Savage, Jon (9 May 2008). "Controlled chaos". The Guardian. Retrieved 21 March 2016.
^ Newman, Kim (2009). "Doctor Who: Paradise Towers (1987)". The Kim Newman Archive. Archived from the original on 16 December 2010. Retrieved 15 December 2014.
^ Dowling, Stephen (20 April 2009). "What pop music tells us about JG Ballard". London: BBC News. Retrieved 15 December 2014.
^ Sellars, Simon. "Flat block of two dimensions". Ballardian. Archived from the original on 28 February 2018. Retrieved 28 February 2018.
^ "David Cronenberg: Shivers". 11 April 2018. Retrieved 25 November 2024.
^ Water Shed – John Gray and Will Self – JG Ballard
^ "Book Club curated by Godspeed You! Black Emperor".
^ Woerner, Meredith (22 May 2009). "Vincenzo Natali's High Rise Is A Beautiful Skyscraper of Doom". Gizmodo. Retrieved 15 December 2016.
^ Fear, David (20 September 2015). "Toronto 2015: Ben Wheatley on 'High-Rise' and Cult Filmmaking". Rolling Stone. Retrieved 15 December 2016.
^ Woerner, Meredith (5 February 2014). "Tom Hiddleston will star in the movie adaptation of High-Rise!". io9. Retrieved 15 December 2014.
^ Wiseman, Andreas (29 August 2013). "Ben Wheatley to direct JG Ballard's High-Rise for RPC". Screen Daily. Retrieved 15 December 2014.


## External links
JG Ballard.ca
High-Rise at the British Library
v
t
e
The Wind from Nowhere (1961)
The Drowned World (1962)
The Burning World (1964)
The Crystal World (1966)
The Atrocity Exhibition (1969)
Crash (1973)
Concrete Island (1974)
High-Rise (1975)
The Unlimited Dream Company (1979)
Hello America (1981)
Empire of the Sun (1984)
The Day of Creation (1987)
Running Wild (1988)
The Kindness of Women (1991)
Rushing to Paradise (1994)
Cocaine Nights (1996)
Super-Cannes (2000)
Millennium People (2003)
Kingdom Come (2006)
"Mobile" (1957)
"The Concentration City" (1957)
"Track 12" (1958)
"Zone of Terror" (1960)
"The Sound-Sweep" (1960)
"The Voices of Time" (1960)
"Chronopolis" (1960)
"Studio 5, The Stars" (1961)
"Deep End" (1961)
"Mr F. is Mr F." (1961)
"Billennium" (1962)
"Minus One" (1963)
"The Recognition" (1967)
" The Day of Forever" (1967)
"Why I Want to Fuck Ronald Reagan" (1968)
"Venus Smiles" (1971)
The Voices of Time and Other Stories (1962)
Billennium (1962)
Passport to Eternity (1963)
The 4-Dimensional Nightmare (1963)
The Terminal Beach (1964)
The Impossible Man (1966)
The Overloaded Man (1967)
The Disaster Area (1967)
The Day of Forever (1967)
Vermilion Sands (1971)
Chronopolis and Other Stories (1971)
Low-Flying Aircraft and Other Stories (1976)
The Best of J. G. Ballard (1977)
The Best Short Stories of J. G. Ballard (1978)
The Venus Hunters (1980)
Myths of the Near Future (1982)
The Voices of Time (1985)
Memories of the Space Age (1988)
War Fever (1990)
The Complete Short Stories of J. G. Ballard: Volume 1 (2006)
The Complete Short Stories of J. G. Ballard: Volume 2 (2006)
A User's Guide to the Millennium (1996)
Extreme Metaphors (2012)
Miracles of Life (2008)
When Dinosaurs Ruled the Earth (1970)
Crash! (1971)
Empire of the Sun (1987)
Crash (1996)
The Atrocity Exhibition (1998)
Low-Flying Aircraft (2002)
High-Rise (2015)


URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Galaxies_(novel)
Content:

Galaxies is a science fiction novel written by Barry N. Malzberg.[1] It was first published in 1975.[2] Galaxies is a metafictional work in which the writing of a science fiction novel becomes entwined with the novel being written.
Malzberg expanded his short work A Galaxy Called Rome into the full-length novel Galaxies.[3]


## References
^ Paul Di Filippo (March 12, 2020). "Paul Di Filippo Reviews Providence by Max Barry". Locus magazine. Retrieved April 13, 2020. The mediacentric fakeness attendant upon the reality of the war effort and the neurotic tics of the crew are pure Barry Malzberg riffs. One might be reading a successor to Malzberg's Galaxies or perhaps Moorcock's The Black Corridor.
^ Michael W. McClintock (1982). "The Contemporaneity of Barry N. Malzberg". Extrapolation. 23 (2): 138–149. doi:10.3828/extr.1982.23.2.138. Retrieved April 13, 2020. On the first page of his novel, Galaxies (1975), Barry Malzberg specifies a problem which will keep him from finishing.
^ Brian Stableford (January 1, 1979). ""Chorale" by Barry Malzberg (Book Review)". Foundation. p. 78. Retrieved April 13, 2020. Foundation14 then featured my review of Graven Images, the anthology containing Malzberg's novelette "Choral", in which I said that "although the expansion of 'A Galaxy Called Rome' into Galaxies worked very well indeed, I think Choral will be better left as it is".

This article about a 2020s novel is a stub. You can help Wikipedia by expanding it.
v
t
e


URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Female_Man
Content:

The Female Man is a feminist science fiction novel by American writer Joanna Russ. It was originally written in 1970 and first published in 1975 by Bantam Books. Russ was an ardent feminist and challenged sexist views during the 1970s with her novels, short stories, and nonfiction works. These works include We Who Are About To..., "When It Changed", and What Are We Fighting For?: Sex, Race, Class, and the Future of Feminism.
The novel follows the lives of four women living in parallel universes which differ in time and place. The women visit each other's worlds and are startled by the different views on gender roles and social conventions surrounding women and womanhood. Their encounters influence them to reevaluate their lives and redefine what it means to be a woman.
The title of the novel comes from the character Joanna, who transforms into a "female man" in order to be respected and seen beyond her sex.[1] A "female man" is a woman with a man's mind, her body and soul still female.[2] Joanna's metaphorical transformation refers to her decision to seek equality by rejecting women's dependence on men and mirrors the journeys made by the other three protagonists.


## Setting
The Female Man includes several fictional worlds.
Joanna's World: Joanna exists in a world that is similar to Earth in the 1970s.
Jeannine's World: Jeannine lives in New York City in 1969, in a world where the Great Depression never ended and World War II never happened. As a result, her world is in a never ending depression without any significant feminist movements.
Whileaway: Janet's world is an all-female utopian Earth ten centuries in the future called Whileaway, where all the men died from a sex-specific plague 900 years from the beginning of the novel. However in the final chapter, it is suggested by Jael that the plague was a lie and that the men were killed. The language of Whileaway is "Pan-russian" and is nothing like the Russian of the 20th century. To procreate, women in lesbian relationships use technology to genetically merge ova. Although Whileaway is technologically advanced, their societies are mostly agrarian. Whileaway is less concerned with equality than it is with safety.[3] There is no sexual assault or murder, and children are free to play naked and without fear. There are duels which can end in the death of one of the dueling parties but this is commonplace in Whileaway and seen as an effective way to deal with a dispute.
Womanland: Jael's world is a dystopia where men (Manlanders) and women (Womanlanders) are in a literal "battle of the sexes". Although their war has been ongoing for forty years, both societies trade with each other, especially children. Womanlanders keep the female children and exchange male children for resources. In order for men to cope with their sexual desires, a select number of young boys deemed not masculine enough undergo sex change surgery. In lieu of men, Womanlanders like Jael have automatons or pursue lesbian relationships.


## Plot summary
The novel begins when Janet Evason suddenly arrives and disappears in Jeannine's world. Janet is from Whileaway, a futuristic world where a plague killed all of the men over 800 years ago, and Jeannine lives in a world that never experienced the end of the Great Depression. Janet takes Jeannine to Joanna's world, where both women meet in a cocktail lounge and watch Janet's televised interview. She explains to the male interviewer the culture and customs of Whileawayans which differ greatly from Joanna's world. When Janet begins to explain to the interviewer how women in Whileaway "copulate" she is abruptly cut off by a commercial break.
Acting as a guide, Joanna takes Janet to a party in her world to show her how women and men interact with each other. Janet quickly finds herself to be the object of a man's attention as he continually harasses her. After she has had enough, Janet knocks the man down and mocks him. Her behavior shocks everyone at the party, since in Joanna's world, it is believed that women are inferior to men. Janet then expresses her desire to experience living with a typical family to Joanna, who takes Janet to the Wildings’ household in Anytown, U.S.A. Janet meets their teenage daughter Laura Rose who instantly admires Janet's confidence and independence as a woman. Laura realizes that she is attracted to Janet and begins to pursue a sexual relationship with her. This is transgressive for both of them, as Whileaway's taboo against cross-generational relationships (having a relationship with someone old enough to be your parent or young enough to be your child) is as strong as the taboo against same-sex relationships on Laura's world. After the two have sex for the first time, Janet recounts to Laura how she met and fell in love with her wife, Vittoria, back in Whileaway.
Jeannine and Joanna accompany Janet back to Whileaway where they meet Vittoria and stay at their home. A small Whileawayan child follows Joanna and tells her a story about a bear trapped between two worlds as a metaphor for her life. Jeannine returns to her world with Joanna, and they both go to vacation at her brother's house. Jeannine's mother pesters her about her love life and asks whether she is going to get married soon. Jeannine goes on a few dates with some men but still finds herself dissatisfied. Jeannine begins to doubt her sense of reality, but soon decides that she wants to assimilate into her role as a woman. She calls Cal to pick her up and agrees to marry him.
Joanna, Jeannine, and Janet arrive in Jael's world which has had a 40 year old war between men and women. Jael explains that she works for the Bureau of Comparative Ethnology, an organization that concentrates on people's various counterparts in different parallel worlds. She reveals that she is the one who brought all of them together because they are four versions of the same woman. Jael takes all of them with her into enemy territory where she appears to be negotiating a deal with one of the male leaders. At first, the male leader appears to be promoting equality, but Jael quickly realizes that he still believes in the inferiority of women. He relentlessly harasses Jael and tries to convince her that it is necessary for both societies to reconcile. Jael reveals herself as a ruthless assassin, kills the man, and shuttles all of the women back to her house. At her house, the women witness Jael and Davy, her biological automaton, having sex. Jael finally tells the other women why she has assembled all of them. She wants to create secret military bases in the women's worlds without the men's knowledge. Her hope is that eventually, the women in each world will be empowered and overthrow their respective patriarchal societies.
Jeannine and Joanna agree to help Jael assimilate the women soldiers into their worlds, but Janet refuses, given the overall pacifism of Whileaway. Jeannine and Joanna appear to have become stronger individuals and are excited to rise up against their gender roles. Janet is not moved by Jael's intentions so Jael suggests to Janet that the reason for the absence of men on Whileaway is not because of a plague but because the women won the war and killed all of the men in its timeline's past. Janet refuses to believe Jael, and the other women are annoyed at Janet's resistance. The novel ends with the women separating and returning to their worlds, each with a new perspective on her life, her world, and her identity as a woman.


## Characters


### Major characters
Jeannine Nancy Dadier is a twenty-nine year old librarian who lives in a world that never escaped the Great Depression. She has a blue-eyed cat named Mr. Frosty to whom she constantly speaks and lavishes with attention. Jeannine faces constant pressure from her family and society to get married. She doubts her boyfriend Cal's ability to make her happy, but eventually becomes engaged to him. Of all the women, she is the least radicalized and seen as the weakest of all the women. Still, Jael says she is arguably the most intelligent of the four women. At the end of the novel, Jeannine appears to have broken from the expectations of marriage and welcomes the social revolution against men.
Joanna lives in 1969, in a world remarkably similar to Earth. The feminist movement has just begun, and Joanna is determined to refute her world's belief that women are inferior to men. Joanna is witty and smart, but she struggles to assert her abilities and intelligence among her male peers. In order to cope, she repeatedly refers to herself as the “female man” to indicate her adoption of the male gender role and separate herself from being identified as just another woman. She identifies herself as the author of the novel throughout the work. She is named after and based on Russ.[2]
Janet Evason Belin comes from a futuristic world called Whileaway where all the men died of a sex-specific plague over 900 years ago. She is a Safety and Peace officer, similar to a police officer, and has just become an emissary to other worlds. She explains that this is because she is expendable, and relatively stupid compared to other Whileawayans. She is married to Vittoria and has two children. Janet becomes romantically involved with Laura Wilding, the teenage daughter of the family she was staying with in Joanna's world. She is referred to by Jael as "The Strong One" and "Miss Sweden". She is older than the other women, and is the most evolutionary advanced as she has no allergies, appendix, or double joints. In addition to being confident and assertive, Janet is perhaps the most independent from men because she has never experienced patriarchal domination.
Alice Jael Reasoner, often referred to as Jael (codename Sweet Alice), is an assassin living in a world where men and women have been at war for forty years. Each sex has made their own societies, Womanland and Manland, that excludes the other. Jael has silver claws that are revealed when she pulls back the skin and metal teeth, which she uses as her weapons. She is a radical and performs her job well. Jael is the instigator behind the four women's meeting and proposes a revolution against all men.


### Minor characters
Laura Rose, nickname Laur, is the daughter in the family that Janet stays with when she is visiting Joanna's world. She proclaims herself to be a “victim of penis envy,” frustrated that she must stifle her potential in order to become a housewife. She is a shy tomboy with short hair and freckles who struggles in her sexual orientation and womanhood. She daydreams she is Genghis Khan to cope. Janet's confidence and independence from men fascinates Laura, and she begins to pursue a sexual relationship with Janet.
Vittoria is Janet's wife. She and Janet have two daughters. She is mentioned often by Janet and makes a brief appearance when all four women visit Whileaway.
Cal is Jeannine's boyfriend and soon-to-be fiancé. He cries often and wears her necklaces. She does not believe that Cal is masculine enough to provide for her.
Bud Dadier is Jeannine's older brother who teaches high school math. He is married and has two children. He and his mother constantly pressure Jeannine into marriage.
Mrs. Dadier is Jeannine's mother who lives with Jeannine's brother and his family. When Jeannine spends a vacation at her brother's house, Mrs. Dadier plagues Jeannine with lectures regarding the importance of marriage.
Frank, also referred to as X, is a married man who takes Jeannine on a few dates while she stays at her brother's house. He is estranged from his wife, and though Jeannine feels no connection to him, she goes out with him to appease her family.
Davy is Jael's male automaton. His "original germ-plasm" is described as chimpanzee, but he resembles a beautiful young man. Devoid of will, and possibly of all higher brain functions, he is connected to Jael's computerised home and is controlled by her facial cues and verbal commands.
Dunyasha Bernadettson is a Whileawayan philosopher brought up often by Janet throughout the novel.


## Structure and format
The novel is divided into nine parts, with each further divided into chapters. The sections of the novel are usually dedicated to one character's perspective, but often the point of view changes between the four characters and skips from location and time. It is often unclear who is speaking and as a result, creates confusion in the narration. The constant switching in point of view represents the women's, and Russ's, resistance to the male dominated genre.[2] Joanna, Janet, and Jael's perspectives are told in first person narrative, but they often refer to themselves in the third person while the narration is still through their point of view. Laura Wilding is the only minor character to have the narrative told through her perspective. Jeannine's perspective is told solely through a third person narrative until she begins to question her role in a patriarchy and is absorbed in the first person point of view in the final chapter:
We got up and paid our quintuple bill; then we went out onto the street. I said goodbye and went off with Laur, I, Janet; I also watched them go, I, Joanna; forever I went off to show Jael the city, I Jeaninne, I Jael, I myself. (p. 212)
Joanna describes writing the novel, and acknowledges the audience in the final chapter.[2] She describes her style of narration as feminine:
I have no structure…my thoughts seep out shapelessly like menstrual fluid, it is all very female and deep and full of essences, it is very primitive and full of ‘and’s,’ it is called ‘run-on sentences'. (p. 137).
Joanna also inserts imaginary conversations in the form of a script that demonstrate her frustration with men. There are also poems, and Janet often gives background history on Whileaway, including citing a Whileaway philosopher, to provide insight on her culture. Jael is introduced in part two, signaled by an italicized text; however, her story begins in part eight with a repetition of the italicized chapter. It is not until part eight that the novel focuses on Jael and formally introduces her.


## Literary significance and reception
As the feminist movement began to gain attention, many regarded the novel as one of the most influential works in feminist literature[4] and its wide acceptance heralded the start of feminist science fiction.[5] Upon its release, the novel was received favorably.[6]
Douglas Barbour in the Toronto Star wrote:
A work of frightening power, but it is also a work of great fictional subtlety ... it should appeal to all intelligent people who look for exciting ideation, crackling dialogue, provocative fictional games-playing in their reading.
Elizabeth Lynn, of the San Francisco Review of books, described it as "A stunning book, a work to be read with great respect. It’s also screamingly funny."
Though it is highly regarded as an important feminist text, the novel is not without its share of controversy. It is also considered to be dated by some, and divides critics and audiences alike.[7] Most of the criticism received by Russ was on the radical feminism the novel is perceived to propagate.[2] The character Jael implies that the slaughter of men was inevitable and necessary for the feminist utopia. For Jael, violence is the only means through which women can free themselves.[1]


## Allusions and references


### Allusions to other works
"When It Changed" by Joanna Russ: The character Janet, and a different version of Whileaway (a planet colonized from Earth, rather than a future version of Earth itself), exist in the short story "When It Changed".
Gulliver's Travels by Jonathan Swift: Queen Anne is referred to as a "female man" in Chapter 4 of the Houyhnhnms section.
Beowulf from oral tradition: Joanna alludes to Grendel's mother to demonstrate that a woman can be both a nurturing mother and an aggressive, strong woman.
The Subjection of Women by John Stuart Mill: Joanna references Mill when she lists the many examples of how men have historically oppressed women.
The Bible: Jael is named after Yael, who kills Sisera by driving a tent peg through his skull while he sleeps. At one point Russ describes Jael in words paraphrased from the Book of Judges: "At her feet he bowed, he fell, he lay down: at her feet he bowed, he fell: where he bowed, there he fell down dead" (Jdg. 5:27).


### Allusions to history
Russ's novel refers to the problematic issues in the 1970s when the feminist movement became highly influential. Because The Female Man was written during the 1970s, the character Joanna's world is most similar to the real world Russ lived in. The novel also addresses the environmental movement as shown through Janet's utopian society. Though Janet's world is extremely technologically advanced, the women choose to live in agrarian societies. Whileaway forms an idealistic image of an organic environment where nature is preserved despite the radical development of technology.
The novel also mentions the Great Depression, which started in 1929 when the world's economy was plunged into a long and deep recession. In Jeannine's world, however, the Great Depression never ended. The text suggests that the continuation of the Great Depression forced women to seek husbands for financial support and prohibited women from finding jobs of their own, perpetuating gender roles.


## Awards and nominations
After having been nominated for the 1975 Nebula Award for Best Novel, The Female Man won one of three Retrospective Tiptree Awards in 1996.[8] It also won a 2002 Gaylactic Spectrum Hall of Fame Award.[9]


## References
^ a b Teslenko, Tatiana (August 19, 2003). Feminist Utopian Novels of the 1970s. Routledge. doi:10.4324/9780203484340. ISBN 978-1-135-88517-5.
^ a b c d e Hicks, Heather J (1999). "Automating Feminism: The Case of Joanna Russ's The Female Man". Postmodern Culture. 9 (3). doi:10.1353/pmc.1999.0020. ISSN 1053-1920. S2CID 145429730.
^ Cortiel, Jeanne (November 2018). "Risk and Feminist Utopia: Radicalizing the Future". American Journal of Economics and Sociology. 77 (5): 1353–1376. doi:10.1111/ajes.12252. ISSN 0002-9246. S2CID 149746139.
^ Clute1995, pp. 167, 228.
^ Clute and Nicholls 1995, p. 1035.
^ Calvin, Ritch (July 2009). ""This shapeless book": Reception and Joanna Russ's The Female Man". Femspec. 10 (2): 24–34 – via Gale.
^ Gardiner, Judith Kegan (1994). "Empathic Ways of Reading: Narcissism, Cultural Politics, and Russ's "Female Man"". Feminist Studies. 20 (1): 87–111. doi:10.2307/3178434. hdl:2027/spo.0499697.0020.108. ISSN 0046-3663. JSTOR 3178434.
^ "Previous Awards". James Tiptree Jr. Award. Archived from the original on May 21, 2011. Retrieved March 20, 2011.
^ Kelly, Mark R. (2003–2007). "2002 Gaylactic Spectrum Awards". Spectrum Awards. Locus Publications. Archived from the original on July 14, 2015. Retrieved November 13, 2008.


## External links
The Female Man title listing at the Internet Speculative Fiction Database
Book review link resolved at archive.org
Ayres, Susan. "The "Straight Mind" in Russ’s The Female Man" Science Fiction Studies. #65, Vol. 22, part 1 (March 1995).
v
t
e
And Chaos Died (1970)
The Female Man (1975)
We Who Are About To... (1977)
The Two of Them (1978)
"When It Changed" (1972)
The Adventures of Alyx (1976)
The Zanzibar Cat (1983)
Extra(ordinary) People (1984)
The Hidden Side of the Moon (1988)
How to Suppress Women's Writing (1983)
To Write Like a Woman (1995)
v
t
e
Motherlines and Walk to the End of the World by Suzy McKee Charnas
The Left Hand of Darkness by Ursula K. Le Guin
The Female Man and "When It Changed" by Joanna Russ
A Woman of the Iron People by Eleanor Arnason (1991, tie)
White Queen by Gwyneth Jones (1991, tie)
China Mountain Zhang by Maureen F. McHugh (1992)
Ammonite by Nicola Griffith (1993)
"The Matter of Seggri" by Ursula K. Le Guin (1994, tie)
Larque on the Wing by Nancy Springer (1994, tie)
Waking the Moon by Elizabeth Hand (1995, tie)
The Memoirs Of Elizabeth Frankenstein by Theodore Roszak (1995, tie)
"Mountain Ways" by Ursula K. Le Guin (1996, tie)
The Sparrow by Mary Doria Russell (1996, tie)
Black Wine by Candas Jane Dorsey (1997, tie)
"Travels With The Snow Queen" by Kelly Link (1997, tie)
"Congenital Agenesis of Gender Ideation" by Raphael Carter (1998)
The Conqueror's Child by Suzy McKee Charnas (1999)
Wild Life by Molly Gloss (2000)
The Kappa Child by Hiromi Goto (2001)
Light by M. John Harrison (2002, tie)
"Stories for Men" by John Kessel (2002, tie)
Set This House in Order: A Romance of Souls by Matt Ruff (2003)
Camouflage by Joe Haldeman (2004, tie)
Not Before Sundown by Johanna Sinisalo (2004, tie)
Air by Geoff Ryman (2005)
The Orphan's Tales: In the Night Garden by Catherynne M. Valente (2006, tie)
Half Life by Shelley Jackson (2006, tie)
James Tiptree Jr.: The Double Life of Alice B. Sheldon by Julie Phillips (2006, special recognition)
The Carhullan Army by Sarah Hall (2007)
The Knife of Never Letting Go by Patrick Ness (2008, tie)
Filter House by Nisi Shawl (2008, tie)
Cloud and Ashes: Three Winter’s Tales by Greer Gilman (2009, tie)
Ōoku: The Inner Chambers by Fumi Yoshinaga (2009, tie)
Baba Yaga Laid an Egg by Dubravka Ugrešić (2010)
Redwood and Wildfire by Andrea Hairston (2011)
The Drowning Girl by Caitlín R. Kiernan (2012, tie)
Ancient, Ancient by Kiini Ibura Salaam (2012, tie)
Rupetta by N. A. Sulway (2013)
The Girl in the Road by Monica Byrne (2014, tie)
My Real Children by Jo Walton (2014, tie)
"The New Mother" by Eugene Fischer (2015, tie)
Lizard Radio by Pat Schmatz (2015, tie)
When the Moon Was Ours by Anna-Marie McLemore (2016)
Who Runs the World? by Virginia Bergin (2017)
"They Will Dream in the Garden" by Gabriela Damián Miravete (2018)
Freshwater by Akwaeke Emezi (2019)
Ife-Iyoku, the Tale of Imadeyunuagbon by Oghenechovwe Donald Ekpeki (2020)
Light from Uncommon Stars by Ryka Aoki (2021, tie)
Sorrowland by Rivers Solomon (2021, tie)


URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Orbitsville
Content:

Orbitsville is a science fiction novel by British writer Bob Shaw,[1] published in book form in 1975. It is about the discovery of a Dyson sphere-like artefact surrounding a star.
The novel had previously appeared in three installments in Galaxy Science Fiction, in June, July and August 1974. After its publication as a book it won the British Science Fiction Award for the best novel in 1976.
Shaw wrote two sequels, Orbitsville Departure (ISBN 0-671-69831-1), published in 1983, and Orbitsville Judgement, published in 1990.


## References
^ "Orbitsville: Orbitsville Book 1 | ISBNdb". isbndb.com. Retrieved 6 April 2025.


## External links
Orbitsville title listing at the Internet Speculative Fiction Database
v
t
e
Stand on Zanzibar by John Brunner (1969)
The Jagged Orbit by John Brunner (1970)
Rendezvous with Rama by Arthur C. Clarke (1973)
Inverted World by Christopher Priest (1974)
Orbitsville by Bob Shaw (1975)
Brontomek! by Michael G. Coney (1976)
The Jonah Kit by Ian Watson (1977)
A Scanner Darkly by Philip K. Dick (1978)
The Unlimited Dream Company by J. G. Ballard (1979)
Timescape by Gregory Benford (1980)
The Shadow of the Torturer by Gene Wolfe (1981)
Helliconia Spring by Brian W. Aldiss (1982)
Tik-Tok by John Sladek (1983)
Mythago Wood by Robert Holdstock (1984)
Helliconia Winter by Brian W. Aldiss (1985)
The Ragged Astronauts by Bob Shaw (1986)
Gráinne by Keith Roberts (1987)
Lavondyss by Robert Holdstock (1988)
Pyramids by Terry Pratchett (1989)
Take Back Plenty by Colin Greenland (1990)
The Fall of Hyperion by Dan Simmons (1991)
Red Mars by Kim Stanley Robinson (1992)
Aztec Century by Christopher Evans (1993)
Feersum Endjinn by Iain M. Banks (1994)
The Time Ships by Stephen Baxter (1995)
Excession by Iain M. Banks (1996)
The Sparrow by Mary Doria Russell (1997)
The Extremes by Christopher Priest (1998)
The Sky Road by Ken MacLeod (1999)
Ash: A Secret History by Mary Gentle (2000)
Chasm City by Alastair Reynolds (2001)
The Separation by Christopher Priest (2002)
Felaheen by Jon Courtenay Grimwood (2003)
River of Gods by Ian McDonald (2004)
Air by Geoff Ryman (2005)
End of the World Blues by Jon Courtenay Grimwood (2006)
Brasyl by Ian McDonald (2007)
The Night Sessions by Ken MacLeod (2008)
The City & the City by China Miéville (2009)
The Dervish House by Ian McDonald (2010)
The Islanders by Christopher Priest (2011)
Jack Glass by Adam Roberts (2012)
Ancillary Justice by Ann Leckie and Ack-Ack Macaque by Gareth L. Powell (tie) (2013)
Ancillary Sword by Ann Leckie (2014)
The House of Shattered Wings by Aliette de Bodard (2015)
Europe in Winter by Dave Hutchinson (2016)
The Rift by Nina Allan (2017)
Embers of War by Gareth L. Powell (2018)
Children of Ruin by Adrian Tchaikovsky (2019)
The City We Became by N. K. Jemisin (2020)
Shards of Earth by Adrian Tchaikovsky (2021)
City of Last Chances by Adrian Tchaikovsky (2022)
The Green Man’s Quarry by Juliet E. McKenna (2023)
Three Eight One by Aliya Whiteley (2024)

This article about a 1970s science fiction novel is a stub. You can help Wikipedia by expanding it.
See guidelines for writing about novels. Further suggestions might be found on the article's talk page.
v
t
e


URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Alteration
Content:

The Alteration is a 1976 alternate history novel by Kingsley Amis, set in a parallel universe in which the Reformation did not take place. It won the John W. Campbell Memorial Award in 1977.[1]


## Creative origins
In his biography of Kingsley Amis, Richard Bradford devotes a chapter to The Alteration, its origins and context within the author's life. In 1973, Amis had heard a reproduction of the voice of Alessandro Moreschi, the last known European castrato. Amis disagreed with the proposition that Moreschi's performance could be considered "great art", because Moreschi had been castrated, and "true" art centred on the celebration of human sexuality.
Bradford argues that this was a matter of considerable importance for Amis himself, as he may have been suffering from impotence or sexual dysfunction in his marriage, due to advancing age. Thus, he took exception to Roman Catholic teaching, based as it was in a magisterium of celibate men.


## Plot
The main character, ten-year-old Hubert Anvil, is a chorister at St George's Basilica, Coverley (real world Cowley), for whom tragedy beckons when his teachers and the Church hierarchy, all the way up to the Pope himself, decree that the boy's superb voice is too precious to sacrifice to puberty. Despite his own misgivings, he must undergo castration, one of the two alterations of the title. Insight into this world is offered during Anvil's abortive escape from church authorities, with references to alternative world versions of known political and cultural figures. Hubert's mother carries on an illicit affair with the family chaplain, and his brother, Anthony, is a liberal dissident from repressive church policies.
In this timeline, there are two pivotal divergences from known history. Arthur Tudor and Catherine of Aragon's short-lived union produced a son, Stephen II of England. When Henry of York ("the Abominable") tried to usurp his nephew's throne, there was a papal crusade (the "War of the English Succession") to restore the rightful heir, culminating in the "Holy Victory" at Coverley, which was designated as the ecclesiastical capital of England.
Secondly, the Protestant Reformation did not take place as Martin Luther was reconciled to the Roman Catholic Church and later became Pope Germanian I. Luther's anti-Semitism may have infected this history to a greater extent during his papacy,[citation needed] as the novel discloses that Jews are forced to seclude themselves and wear yellow stars to advertise their religious and ethnic identity. In this history, Thomas More did not marry, and ascended to the Papacy as Pope Hadrian VII.
While the Papacy still holds sway across Western Europe, in this version of the twentieth century Protestantism is limited to the breakaway Republic of New England, which includes such locations as Cranmeria (named after Thomas Cranmer), Hussville (named for Jan Huss), Waldensia (Waldensians) and Wyclif City (John Wycliffe). The head of the schismatic church in New England is the Archpresbyter of Arnoldstown (named after Benedict Arnold). Joseph Rudyard Kipling held office as "First Citizen" from 1914 to 1918, while Edgar Allan Poe was an acclaimed general who died at the moment of his victory over the combined forces of Louisiana and Mexico in the war of 1848–1850. We learn towards the end of the book that this Protestant state also has unpleasant features, such as practising apartheid towards Native Americans and a harsh penal system.
England dominates the British Isles with Ireland being called "West-England" and Scotland being annexed to England as "North-England". Instead of parliamentary democracy, the English Isles are administered by a Convocation of clergy accountable to the Catholic hierarchy. The rule of the Church is absolute and totalitarian, controlled by the Holy Office, a sort of KGB or Gestapo equivalent. (Monsignors Henricus and Laurentius – Heinrich Himmler and Lavrentiy Beria – are mentioned in passing.)
The state of the world is illustrated in a description of national, clerical and royal figures at the funeral of Stephen III, late King of England, which opens the book. There is reference to the Kings of Portugal, Sweden, Naples and Lithuania, which suggests that no Italian nation-state exists in this history due to the temporal strength of the Papacy. The Crown Prince of Muscovy is also mentioned, suggesting that Tsarism holds sway, and the Dauphin leads one to conclude that the French monarchy is also still in existence. Germany is a nation-state, known as Almaigne and ruled by an Emperor, although it may not have exactly the same national boundaries. The "Vicar General" of the "Emperor Patriarch" of Candia suggests that the Greek Orthodox Church survives as a separate ecclesiastical jurisdiction, albeit exiled from its native Greece (which is still under Ottoman domination) and with its headquarters in Crete. Finally, this opening section cites the "Viceroys" of India, Brazil and New Spain, suggesting that colonialism and direct imperialism are still realities here.
A Christian/Muslim cold war exists between the Papacy and the Ottoman Empire. Described as a war against an opponent that can never be destroyed and which can be held in check only by maintaining permanent armies and fleets, it serves the useful purpose of distracting any tendency to rebel or question. Pope John XXIV is a Machiavellian Yorkshireman, who allows the cold war to heat up as a Malthusian plot to resolve Europe's population growth – the church has access to bacteriological warfare as an alternative to birth control, whose prior papal prohibition John XXIV opposes. The book's coda, set in 1991, fifteen years after the events of the main body of the book, reveals that events have turned out as the Pope planned. Europe's surplus population has become cannon fodder for the war, which ended in a narrow victory although the Ottoman Empire got as far as Brussels. However, one of Hubert's childhood friends, Decuman, is mentioned as being among the occupation troops in Adrianople in far western Turkey, suggesting that the Ottomans either lost the war, or at least were forced to make significant territorial concessions to the Catholic West.
William Shakespeare's work was suppressed in this history, although Thomas Kyd's original text of Hamlet has survived, and is still performed in 1976 (albeit only in New England). Shelley lived until 1853, at which point he set fire to Castel Gandolfo outside Rome and perished. By contrast, Mozart, Beethoven, Blake, Hockney and Holman Hunt have allowed their talents to submit to religious authority. Edward Bradford argues that the choice of authors and musicians here is not meant to imply Amis's own preferences, but questions the value of art subordinated to a destructive ideology that represses sexual freedom and human choice.[citation needed] Underscoring the clerical domination of this world, Hubert's small collection of books includes a set of Father Bond novels (an amalgam of Father Brown and James Bond), as well as Lord of the Chalices (The Lord of the Rings), Saint Lemuel's Travels (Gulliver's Travels), and The Wind in the Cloisters (The Wind in the Willows). There is also reference to a Monsignor Jean-Paul Sartre of the Jesuits, and A. J. Ayer (who was in real life a noted atheist) is Professor of Dogmatic Theology at New College, Oxford.
"Science" is literally a dirty word, and while "invention" is not, the scope of inventors is severely limited. Electricity has been banned; the only form of internal combustion engine permitted is the Diesel, which works without a spark. Some of the incidental pleasure of the book is in the "alternative technology" reminiscent of Amis's friend and fellow-author Harry Harrison, such as the high-speed train that takes characters from London to Rome in just seven hours, via Thomas Sopwith's Channel Bridge. Airships feature as a mode of transportation connecting Europe with Africa and North America, with heavier-than-air vehicles being exclusive to New England.
Allusion to known historical figures include the political scene in Britain in the 1970s, and may reflect Amis's increasingly conservative attitudes.[citation needed] For example, Lord Stansgate (Tony Benn) presides over the Holy Office, and Officers Paul Foot and Corin Redgrave are two of its feared operatives. Pope John XXIV is a thinly disguised Harold Wilson and his Secretary of State is Enrico Berlinguer. Other references are more obscure; opera-lovers with a good knowledge of Latin will, however, be able to identify the two castrati from the Vatican, Federicus Mirabilis and Lupigradus Viaventosa, as the German singers Fritz Wunderlich and Wolfgang Windgassen, both recently deceased when Amis was writing.


## Alternative parallel-world novels withinThe Alteration
Just as The Man in the High Castle features a book titled The Grasshopper Lies Heavy, depicting a world (but not our own) in which the Axis powers lost World War II, so The Alteration refers to an alternate history book by one Philip K. Dick entitled The Man in the High Castle.[2] This book-within-a-book depicts a world in which Stephen II was never born, so the "Holy Victory" never happened, and Henry VIII became king legitimately. As in reality, Henry married Catherine of Aragon, but their son Henry, Duke of Cornwall survived infancy, becoming Henry IX in 1547. Martin Luther became "schismatic" in this world, as he did in reality, and a "Union" of former English North American colonies breaks away in 1848 instead of 1776, conquering most of North America. The same book also features the publication of The Origin of Species, the widespread application of electricity including in aviation and Beethoven's composing of twenty symphonies before his death in 1835.
Galliard, an alternative-universe counterpart to Keith Roberts's Pavane, is also mentioned in this tribute to the subgenre. (The Galliard and the Pavane were both forms of Renaissance dance.)


## References
^ Raets, Stefan (24 April 2013). "A Most Admirably Foul Counterfeit World: The Alteration by Kingsley Amis". TOR. Retrieved 18 June 2014.
^ "What if? Alternative history's butterfly moments reach lift-off". TheGuardian.com. Retrieved 13 September 2017.


## Further reading
Bradford, Richard. Lucky Him: The Life of Kingsley Amis. London: Peter Owens, 2001. ISBN 0-7206-1117-2.
v
t
e
Lucky Jim (1954)
That Uncertain Feeling (1955)
I Like It Here (1958)
Take a Girl Like You (1960)
The Anti-Death League (1966)
Colonel Sun (1968)
The Green Man (1969)
Girl, 20 (1971)
The Alteration (1976)
Jake's Thing (1978)
Stanley and the Women (1984)
The Old Devils (1986)
The Folks That Live on the Hill (1990)
The Russian Girl (1992)
The James Bond Dossier (1965)
The Book of Bond, or Every Man His Own 007 (1965)
The Letters of Kingsley Amis (2001)
Lucky Jim (1957)
Only Two Can Play (1962)
Further Adventures of Lucky Jim (1967)
Take a Girl Like You (1970)
The Further Adventures of Lucky Jim (1982)
That Uncertain Feeling (1986)
The Green Man (1990)
Stanley and the Women (1991)
The Old Devils (1992)
Take a Girl Like You (2000)
Lucky Jim (2003)
Elizabeth Jane Howard (wife)
Martin Amis (son)
Robert Markham (pseudonym)
Lemmons (home)


URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Woman_on_the_Edge_of_Time
Content:

Woman on the Edge of Time is a 1976 feminist science fiction novel by American writer Marge Piercy. The novel was originally published by Alfred A. Knopf. Piercy draws on several inspirations to write this novel such as utopian studies, technoscience, socialization, and female fantasies. One of Piercy's main inspirations for her utopian novels is Plato's Republic. Piercy describes the novel as, "if only…"[1]


## Plot summary
In the 1970s, impoverished yet intelligent thirty-seven-year-old Mexican-American Consuelo "Connie" Ramos, a resident of Spanish Harlem, is unfairly incarcerated in a New York mental hospital due to her supposed violent criminal tendencies. She had been recently released from a previous voluntary commitment in a mental institution after an episode of drug-related child neglect, which led her to lose custody of her daughter. Connie is caught within the government welfare and child custody labyrinth of 1970s New York City. She is after the first scene recommitted involuntarily by her niece's pimp on grounds of violent behavior, after she strikes him in the course of protecting her niece, Dolly (Dolores), from him. Dolly had sought Connie's protection because she was being forced by the pimp into having an illegal abortion.
One of Connie's chief abilities is her perceptiveness and empathy. As a result, before being committed, Connie had for some time begun to communicate with ("receive" from) a figure from the future: an androgynous young woman named Luciente. Connie retains her visions and her connection, which become more and more real, even while heavily drugged in the mental hospital, based loosely on Bellevue and other mental institutions from that period. Luciente is time-traveling from a future (the date is given as 2137), in which a number of goals of the political and social agenda of the late 1960s and early 1970s radical movements have been fulfilled. Environmental pollution, patriarchy, homelessness, homophobia, racism, ethnocentrism, phallogocentrism, sexism, class-subordination, food injustice, consumerism, imperialism, and totalitarianism have been effectively dealt with in this world, which is governmentally decentralized in a loose version of anarchism.
In contrast to the contemporary 1970s setting in an abusive mental institution where patients are labelled "violent," "incapable," "irrational," etc. on the basis of their response to an unjust and harshly stratified class-, race-, and gender-ridden society, future dwellers experience enormous personal freedom and train one another in self-control and ways of producing win-win results in all social situations. In particular, the subjects of volition and free will, mental institutionalization, and interference in others' willed actions are key to the vision of the utopian future. Connie is introduced by Luciente to the agrarian, income-sharing community of Mattapoisett, where children grow up in a culture where they are encouraged to know themselves and their own minds and emotions thoroughly through practicing a type of meditation from an early age ("in-knowing"), in the service of social harmony and the ability to communicate with others without domination or subservience.
This classless, gender-neutral (non-gendered pronouns are used, notably "per" or "person" for "he" or "she"), racial-difference-affirming society is sketched in detail, including meeting and discussion structures that eliminate power differentials as much as possible, the extensive use of technology only for social good, the replacement of business and corporate agendas with general planning for social justice and respect for all human beings' individuality. Disputes between towns and regions are settled peacefully through discussion and merit-based competition of ideas, with the winning parties being obliged to "throw a big party for" or otherwise conciliate the losers in each case, in order to maintain friendly relations.
A 1970s emphasis on individual freedom can be seen at times: each person lives in a private tent or one-room home, and children develop outside the womb of an individual and are adopted by three "mothers" (of any gender) who guard and teach them only until puberty; every person chooses per own name, and can also choose per's field of study and work, as well as when to disengage from per community, or join a new one; total freedom also applies to one's mental and emotional choices: In this future, world one can check oneself into and out of the equivalent of a sanitorium at will, go into or out of various kinds of therapy, or take a mental break in some other way, and no other person has the right to choose this on one's behalf. One's field of work is self-chosen, and dicta apply to both one's life path and one's mental or emotional desires, needs, and capacities: "Per must not do what per cannot do" and "Per must do what per needs to do" are applied to both personal/emotional and professional life choices insofar as possible. There are limits to this utopia, which threaten always at the margins: the death penalty is imposed on occasion, and war is in the background, but both are considered extreme and unusual measures.
Connie learns tools of emotional and physical survival from Luciente and the future population of Mattapoisett, and comes to feel that she is living at an important time in history, and that she herself is in a pivotal position; her actions and decisions will determine the course of history. However, after returning to the present, Connie is signed up for an experimental procedure by her brother, one intended to “cure” her illness by releasing chemicals into her brain every time she feels a negative emotion. Her implant, however, is removed because her frequent trips to visit Luciente result in her lying for hours in a coma-like state, which worries the doctors. During this time, Connie visits another future, possibly caused by a butterfly effect resulting from her surgery. In particular, it is slowly revealed that Luciente's utopia is only one possible future; alternate futures are a possibility, and the novel shows us one example: a future consumerist, hyper-capitalist, environmentally sick and strictly classist, racist, and gender-stratified society in which a wealthy elite, known as the "richies" live on space platforms, sustaining themselves by dominating and exploiting the majority of the population through total control of knowledge and technology, personal control extending to physical "farming" of bodies (harvesting organs regularly) and the surgical control of moods through the use of psychotropic drugs. Women in this intensely violent, misogynistic and homophobic world of what is now known as "New New York" are valued and "grown" solely for appearance and sexuality, and plastic surgery that gives women grotesquely exaggerated sexual features is commonplace. Climate change has also negatively affected this alternative future, forcing humanity to live in skyscrapers where they are segregated by class, now known as "flacks." Connie encounters a prostitute in this future named Gildina 547-921-45-822-KBJ, whose views differ from that of Luciente's. People in this future are effectively dehumanized by being given a first name and a number tag to replace their last name, effectively eroding the barrier between person and commodity. After Connie and Gildina's conversation is interrupted by a guard on Gildina's floor, Connie immediately returns to the present before she can be attacked.
It does not decide for the reader whether Connie's visions are by-products of her mental instability or are literal time-travel, but ultimately, Connie's confrontation with the future inspires her to violent revolt against her institutional captors. After a visit to her brother where she is able to steal a fast-acting and lethal poison, she makes one last visit to Mattapoisett to say goodbye to Luciente and her new friends. Luciente's romantic partner Jackrabbit has been killed; however, which can be seen as a reflection of Connie's tragic romances. After returning to the present, she dumps the poison into the coffee pot of the doctors in charge of the experiments. She uses her limited means, despite her very restricted situation, in a desperate and apparently heroic way to prevent the dissemination of the mind-control technology that makes the future dystopia possible, putting an end to the mind-control experiments and prevents the lobotomy operation that had been planned for her and hundreds of other imprisoned patients. Connie acts in the tradition of revolts by oppressed or subaltern classes to put a wrench into the system of oppression within which she is caught. Though her revolutionary action ensures her own permanent incarceration and possible death sentence, and may not ensure the existence of the Mattapoisett future, Connie nevertheless sees her act as a victory, and perhaps the reader is encouraged to agree: "I'm a dead woman now too. … But I did fight them. … I tried."


## Major themes


### Social transformation
The essence of Piercy's utopian vision is social transformation achieved after the existing civilization had been destroyed through environmental degradation and war. "The transformation of existing society into utopia is a precarious enterprise attainable only through a process of making choices and crossing boundaries."[2] Descriptions of Mattapoisett, the potential future society described in the novel, emphasize that collective struggle has led to their egalitarian lifestyle and collective action is how they get along so well. "What is most important in Piercy's concern with activism is the basic connection between personal action and historical change itself. The revolution is not inevitable. It is a process of change that may require appropriate conditions and happen more readily at particular historical moments, but it will not happen at all without personal commitment and struggle."[3] The reader is left to decide whether Mattapoisett and the self-determination of its inhabitants are real or figments of Connie's imagination. "By couching the reality of Connie's visions in ambiguity, the text questions the idealism of utopian thinking while showing that social change nevertheless starts in the realm of ideas."[4] The novel criticizes mental institutions and hospitalization of its time extensively, and brings the problem of free will to the forefront as well as suggesting alternative routes to mental wellness and social reform. Throughout the novel, Piercy demonstrates that violence is the key to getting change to occur. Connie's revolt against the system may have been unsuccessful, but it had inspired others to continue to fight.[5] This overarching theme ties into real life as feminists and other activist groups have fought for social change during the 1970s.


### Feminism
Piercy has described Mattapoisett as not a utopia "because it's accessible. There's almost nothing there except the brooder not accessible now. So it's hardly a utopia; it is very intentionally not a utopia because it is not strikingly new. The ideas are the ideas basically of the women's movement."[6] Each character in Mattapoisett has a counterpart in Connie's present world, juxtaposing differences in personal power hence, opportunities for self-actualization. For example, Connie's friend Skip who has been committed to the mental institution by his father for being gay reminds her of Jackrabbit, a bisexual person who is not only accepted but very popular in Mattapoisett. In stark contrast to the mental hospital where the doctors are all men, in Mattapoisett, women have a special tradition and role in healing,[7] and positions of power rotate among men and women alike. Even traditional parental power has been done away with, and the experience of motherhood is shared among women and men, as technology has been developed to gestate babies in a mechanical brooder and men have been enabled to breast-feed.[8] Motherhood is seen as a duty to be shared equally by each parent, regardless of gender. "In addition, critics have treated the novel as an allegory for the conflict in academia between dogmatic feminism and the commitment to motherhood."[4] "The deconstruction of power structures is continued on a linguistic level, where Piercy deletes the dimorphism of the objective and possessive pronouns 'his' and 'her,' which have been replaced with the unisex 'per' referencing the single personal pronoun 'person.'"[9] Feminist futurists argue that Piercy's nonlinear and complex structure of the novel leads to a more broad argument in regards to feminism. This idea is arguing to show that in order to deal with feminist solutions for the future, that there are problems from the past that must be addressed.[10]


### LGBTQIA+ equality
The idea of queer characters can be seen throughout the novel with Skip, Jackrabbit, and Luciente. Piercy shows the Skip going to a mental hospital for being gay showcasing her continuation of struggle other individuals. Also, Luciente has a queer relationship with her friend Diana. Piercy through this novel shows through the struggles of queer characters that there is progress to be made for those who are queer. Connie goes through a journey in Mattiposett in regards to the queer characters as she associates gendered roles to parents of the children. This is disproven by Luciente as they have both masculine and feminine qualities while in a queer relationship. Connie soon adapts to this idea by and begins to embrace homosexuality casting aside her patriarchal ideals from her present time. Through Piercy's portrayal of Connie's adaptation to Mattipoisett's homosexual relationships, it continues to show Piercy's point of queer progress in the novel.[11]


## Literary significance and reception
Early reviews called the novel absorbing and exciting and beautifully written, but also polemical and didactic. Piercy's utopia was noted for "literally embodying every ideal of the counterculture/Movement: ecological wisdom, community, androgyny, ritual, respect for madness, propertylessness, etc."[12] At the time, leaving the Sixties behind, American novels generally shared a post-apocalyptic feeling, asking "what are to be the new social and spiritual arrangements now that the old ones are completely shattered?"[13] In that context, Roger Sale, in the New York Times, found nothing new in Woman on the Edge of Time, calling the book imitative and derivative, and pointing out that "the major instruments … are terribly familiar pieces of apparatus, the mental hospital and a utopian community of the future."[14] Academic reviews, however, placed the novel among the important innovative fiction of the mid-1970s, characteristically works of social realism, all in some way describing a "new consciousness," "even though they don't always use the techniques of verisimilitude, and despite the mythical dimension of their representative characters."[13]
Combining feminist ideals with utopian visions of a future society based on principles of community and equality, Piercy imagined a post-apocalyptic world that established Woman on the Edge of Time as an early feminist innovation in the traditionally male genre of dystopian fiction. Depictions of sexuality and relations between the genders were already recognized as useful elements in depicting the conflict between individual and societal demands. "For example, the governments of dystopian societies like those described in We, Brave New World, and 1984 all focus on sexuality as a crucial matter for their efforts at social control. And it is also clear that this focus comes about largely because of a perception on the part of these governments that sexuality is a potential locus of powerful subversive energies."[15] Woman on the Edge of Time "finely counterpoints the utopianism of Mattapoisset with the dystopian realism with which Connie's actual world is represented."[16] The novel has been analyzed as a dystopia, as speculative fiction, and as realist fiction with fantastic episodes.[9] "By her vivid and coherent descriptions of new social institutions, Piercy has answered the famous Cold War dystopias like 1984 and Brave New World which lament that there is no possibility of imagining an anti-totalitarian society."[17] The book is often compared with other feminist utopian or dystopian fantasies such as Ursula K. Le Guin's The Dispossessed and The Left Hand of Darkness, Joanna Russ's The Female Man, Angela Carter's The Passion of New Eve, and Margaret Atwood's The Handmaid's Tale.[16]


## References
^ Piercy, Marge (1994). "Telling Stories About Stories". Utopian Studies. 5 (2): 1–3. ISSN 1045-991X. JSTOR 20719308.
^ Afnan, Elham (Winter 1996). "Chaos and Utopia: Social Transformation in 'Woman on the Edge of Time'". Extrapolation. 37 (4). Kent State University Press: 330–340. doi:10.3828/extr.1996.37.4.330. ISSN 0014-5483.
^ Moylan, Tom (2014) [1986; Originally published in Demand the Impossible: Science Fiction and the Utopian Imagination, Methuen, 1986, pp. 121-155]. Hunter, Jeffrey (ed.). "Marge Piercy, 'Woman on the Edge of Time'". Contemporary Literary Criticism. 347. Gale. Retrieved March 30, 2017.
^ a b Hunter, Jeffrey, ed. (2014). "Woman on the Edge of Time". Contemporary Literary Criticism. 347. Gale. Retrieved March 30, 2017.
^ Bussiere, K. (2019). Feminist Future: Time Travel in Marge Piercy’s Woman on the Edge of Time. Journal of Science Fiction, 3(3), 33–42.
^ Piercy, Marge (1983). Parti-Colored Blocks for a Quilt. Poets on Poetry. Ann Arbor, MI: University of Michigan Press. pp. 100. ISBN 978-0-472-06338-3.
^ Walker, Sue B. (2000). Giles, James R.; Giles, Wanda H. (eds.). "Marge Piercy". Dictionary of Literary Biography. American Novelists Since World War II: Sixth Series. 227. Gale. Retrieved March 30, 2017.
^ Orr, Elaine (Spring 1993). "Mothering as Good Fiction: Instances from Marge Piercy's Woman on the Edge of Time". Journal of Narrative Fiction. 23 (2): 61–79. JSTOR 30225380.
^ a b Shands, Kerstin W. (2014) [1994; Originally published in The Repair of the World: The Novels of Marge Piercy, Greenwood Press, 1994, pp. 65-82]. Hunter, Jeffrey (ed.). "Woman on the Edge of Time". Contemporary Literary Criticism. 347. Gale.
^ McBean, S. (2014). Feminism and Futurity: Revisiting Marge Piercy's Woman on the Edge of Time. Feminist Review, 107, 37–56.
^ Mann, K. L. (2009). The First Thing Out the Window: Race, Radical Feminism, and Marge Piercy's "Woman on the Edge of Time". William and Mary ScholarWorks: Dissertations, Theses, and Masters Projects.
^ "Woman on the Edge of Time by Marge Piercy". Kirkus Reviews. June 1, 1976.
^ a b Olderman, Raymond M. (1978). "American Fiction 1974–1976: The People Who Fell to Earth". Contemporary Literature. 19 (4): 497–530. doi:10.2307/1208096. JSTOR 1208096.
^ Sale, Roger (June 20, 1976). "Woman on the Edge of Time". New York Times. p. 189. Retrieved April 7, 2017.
^ Booker, M. Keith (November 1994). "Woman on the Edge of a Genre: The Feminist Dystopias of Marge Piercy". Science Fiction Studies. 21 (3): 337–350. JSTOR 4240370.
^ a b Pykett, Lyn (1996). Brown, Susan Windisch (ed.). "Marge Piercy: Overview". Contemporary Novelists (6th ed.). St. James, MO: St. James Press. Retrieved March 30, 2017.
^ Du Plessis, Rachel Blau (1985). Showalter, Elaine (ed.). "For the Etruscans". The New Feminist Criticism: Essays on Women, Literature, and Theory. New York: Pantheon Books: 271–291.
Lefanu, Sarah (1988). In the Chinks of the World Machine: Feminism and Science Fiction. London: The Women's Press. ISBN 0-7043-4092-5.
Lefanu, Sarah (1989). Feminism and Science Fiction. Bloomington, IN: Indiana University Press. ISBN 0-253-23100-0. (U.S. variant title of preceding)


## External links
Woman on the Edge of Time title listing at the Internet Speculative Fiction Database
v
t
e
Christine de Pizan (1364–1430)
Margaret Cavendish (1623–1673)
Marie-Anne Robert (1705–1771)
Mary Griffith (1772–1846)
Mary Shelley (1797–1851)
Jane Wells Webb Loudon (1807–1858)
Annie Denton Cridge (1825–1875)
Rhoda Broughton (1840–1920)
Bertha von Suttner (1843–1914)
Mary E. Bradley Lane (1844–1930)
Elizabeth Burgoyne Corbett (1846–1930)
Auguste Groner (1850–1929)
Renée Marie Gouraud d'Ablancourt (1853–1941)
Irene Clyde (1869–1954)
Charlotte Perkins Gilman (1860–1935)
Inez Haynes Irwin (1873–1970)
Rokeya Sakhawat Hussain (1880–1932)
Rosa Rosà (1884—1978)
Miriam Allen DeFord (1888–1975)
Aurora Bertrana (1892—1974)
Anna Banti (1895—1985)
L. Taylor Hansen (1897–1976)
Karin Boye (1900—1941)
Stella Gibbons (1902–1989)
Leslie F. Stone (1905–1991)
C. L. Moore (1911–1987)
James Tiptree Jr. (1915—1987)
Alice Eleanor Jones (1916–1981)
Shirley Jackson (1916–1965)
Elisabeth Mann-Borgese (1918—2002)
Madeleine L'Engle (1918–2007)
Doris Lessing (1919–2013)
Marlen Haushofer (1920–1970)
Françoise d'Eaubonne (1920–2005)
Carol Emshwiller (1921–2019)
Virginia Kidd (1921—2003)
Judith Merril (1923–1997)
Kate Wilhelm (1928—2018)
Sonya Dorman (1924–2005)
Angélica Gorodischer (1928–2022)
Ursula K. Le Guin (1929–2018)
Sheri S. Tepper (1929—2016)
Sally Miller Gearhart (1931—2021)
Fay Weldon (1931—2023)
Nancy Bogen b. 1932
Sophie Behr (b. 1935)
Marge Piercy (b. 1936)
Joanna Russ (1937–2011)
Margaret Atwood (b. 1939)
Suzy McKee Charnas (1939–2023)
Jutta Heinrich (1940–2021)
Gerd Brantenberg (b. 1941)
Chelsea Quinn Yarbro (b. 1942)
Eleanor Arnason (b. 1942)
Samuel R. Delany (b. 1942)
Donna Haraway (b. 1944)
Rachel Pollack (1945–2023)
Elizabeth A. Lynn (b. 1946)
Octavia E. Butler (1947–2006)
Joëlle Wintrebert (b. 1949)
Lois McMaster Bujold (b. 1949 )
Dubravka Ugrešić (b. 1949)
Roz Kaveney (b. 1949)
Karen Joy Fowler (b. 1950)
L. Timmel Duchamp (b. 1950)
Charlotte Kerner (b. 1950)
Leigh Kennedy (b. 1951)
Stéphanie Nicot (b. 1952)
Marleen S. Barr (b. 1953)
Pat Murphy (b. 1955)
Ellen Kushner (b. 1955)
Montse Watkins (1955–2000)
Joan Slonczewski (b. 1956)
Mary Gentle (b. 1956)
Laura J. Mixon (b. 1957)
Luce Basseterre [fr] (b. 1957)
Rieko Matsuura (b. 1958)
Ninni Holmqvist (b. 1958)
Mari Kotani (b. 1958)
Ïan Larue (b. 1958)
Nicoletta Vallorani (b. 1958)
Maureen F. McHugh (b. 1959)
Lucie Chenu (b. 1960)
Neil Gaiman (b. 1960)
Melissa Scott (b. 1960)
Nalo Hopkinson (b. 1960)
Nicola Griffith (b. 1960)
Gabriela Bustelo (b. 1962)
Lola Robles (b. 1963)
Hiroe Suga (b. 1963)
Jo Walton (b. 1964)
Heidrun Jänchen (b. 1964)
Tananarive Due (b. 1966)
Catherine Dufour (b. 1966)
Ann Leckie (b. 1966)
Virginia Bergin (b. 1966)
Justine Larbalestier (b. 1967)
Kelly Robson (b. 1967)
Yumiko Shirai (b. 1967)
Sara Doke (b. 1968)
Annalee Newitz (b. 1969)
Charlie Jane Anders (b. 1969)
Lisa Yaszek (b. 1969)
Barbara Kirchner [fr] (b. 1970)
Kelly Sue DeConnick (b. 1970)
Li-Cam (b. 1970)
Fumi Yoshinaga (b. 1971)
N. K. Jemisin (b. 1972)
Sheree R. Thomas (b. 1972)
Naomi Novik (b. 1973)
Kiini Ibura Salaam (b. 1973)
Sabrina Calvo (b. 1974)
Juli Zeh (b. 1974)
Nnedi Okorafor (b. 1974)
Catherynne M. Valente (b. 1979)
Kameron Hurley (b. 1980)
Judith C. Vogt (b. 1981)
Nghi Vo (b. 1981)
Tang Fei (b. 1983)
Amal El-Mohtar (b. 1984)
Hao Jingfang (b. 1984)
Theresa Hannig (b. 1984)
Becky Chambers (b. 1985)
Tamsyn Muir (b. 1985)
Aline Valek (b. 1986)
Akwaeke Emezi (b. 1987)
Nadia Chonville (b. 1989)
Floriane Soulas (b. 1989)
Xiran Jay Zhao (b. 1997)
Benjanun Sriduangkaew (b. ?)
Vandana Singh (b. ?)
The Book of the City of Ladies (1405)
The Blazing World (1666)
The Voyages of Lord Seaton to the Seven Planets (1765)
Frankenstein (1818)
Man's Rights; Or, How Would You Like It? (1870)
Mizora (1880)
New Amazonia: A Foretaste of the Future (1889)
Iola Leroy (1892)
Unveiling a Parallel (1893)
Arqtiq (1899)
NEQUA or The Problem of the Ages (1900)
Sultana's Dream (1905)
Beatrice the Sixteenth (1909)
Moving the Mountain (1911)
Angel Island (1914)
Herland (1915)
"Shambleau" (1933)
"That Only a Mother" (1948)
A Wrinkle in Time (1962)
Memoirs of a Spacewoman (1962)
"When I Was Miss Dow" (1966)
"Aye, and Gomorrah" (1967)
The Left Hand of Darkness (1969)
And Chaos Died (1970)
The Kin of Ata Are Waiting for You (1971)
The Word for World is Forest (1972)
"When It Changed" (1972)
Ten Thousand Light-Years from Home (1973)
"The Women Men Don't See" (1973)
The Dispossessed (1974)
"The Girl Who Was Plugged In" (1974)
The Holdfast Chronicles (1974–1999)
The Female Man (1975)
Woman on the Edge of Time (1976)
Houston, Houston, Do You Read? (1976)
The Female Man (1977)
Egalia's Daughters (1977)
Up the Walls of the World (1978)
The Eye of the Heron (1978)
Star Songs of an Old Primate (1978)
Kindred (1979)
The Marriages Between Zones Three, Four and Five (1980)
The Vampire Tapestry (1980)
"Souls" (1982)
Native Tongue (1984)
The Handmaid's Tale (1985)
Brightness Falls from the Air (1985)
A Door into Ocean (1986)
Golden Days (1987)
Lilith's Brood (1987)
"Rachel in Love" (1987)
The Gate to Women's Country (1988)
Her Smoke Rose Up Forever (1990)
Beauty (1991)
He, She and It (1991)
Chroniques du pays des mères (1992)
"The Matter of Seggri" (1993)
Parable of the Sower (1993)
The Fifth Sacred Thing (1993)
Brown Girl in the Ring (1998)
The Fresco (2000)
Tales from Earthsea (2001)
Ōoku: The Inner Chambers (2004–2020)
Bu Bu Jing Xin (2005)
Fledgling (2005)
Le Goût de l'immortalité (2005)
Choir Boy (2005)
Wombs (2009–2016)
The Hundred Thousand Kingdoms (2010)
Who Fears Death (2010)
Lavinia (2008)
The Alchemy of Stone (2008)
The Method (2009)
"Six Months, Three Days" (2011)
Ancillary Justice (2013)
The Automation (2014)
The Fifth Season (2015)
Binti (2015)
The Obelisk Gate (2016)
All the Birds in the Sky (2018)
This Is How You Lose the Time War (2019)
The Empress of Salt and Fortune (2020)
When the Tiger Came Down the Mountain (2020)
The Future of Another Timeline (2021)
Victories Greater Than Death (2021)
Dreams Bigger Than Heartbreak (2022)
The Memory Librarian: And Other Stories of Dirty Computer (2022)
The Daughter of Doctor Moreau (2022)
Promises Stronger Than Darkness (2023)
Cyborg
Feminist science fiction
Gender in speculative fiction
Single-gender world
Women in speculative fiction
Láadan (1982)
Women of Wonder (1975)
Aurora: Beyond Equality (1976)
The Language of the Night (1979)
More Women of Wonder (1979)
How to Suppress Women's Writing (1983)
"A Cyborg Manifesto" (1984)
To Write Like a Woman (1995)
"We Have Always Fought" (2013)
The Geek Feminist Revolution (2016)
Dark Matter: A Century of Speculative Fiction from the African Diaspora (2000)
L'Oiselle (1909)
Jirel of Joiry (1934)
Aqueduct Press
Launch Point Press
Onlywomen Press
Regal Crest Enterprises
Zubaan Books
Forerunner
The Witch and the Chameleon
Janus
Bitch Planet
Sense of Gender Awards
Otherwise Award
Lambda Literary Award
Wiscon
Sad Puppies (2013–2017)


URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Man_Plus
Content:

Man Plus is a 1976 science fiction novel by American writer Frederik Pohl.[3] It won the Nebula Award for Best Novel in 1976,[4] was nominated for the Hugo and Campbell Awards, and placed third in the annual Locus Poll in 1977.[5] The story is about a cyborg, Roger Torraway, who is designed to operate in the harsh Martian environment so that humans can colonize Mars.


## Plot
In the not-too-distant future, the Cold War threatens to turn into a fighting war. Colonization of Mars seems to be mankind's only hope of surviving certain Armageddon. To facilitate this, the US government begins a cyborg program to create a being capable of surviving the harsh Martian environment: Man Plus. After the death of the first candidate, due to the project supervisors forgetting to enhance his brain's ability to process sensory input to cope with the new stimuli he is receiving, Roger Torraway becomes the heart of the program.
To survive in the thin Martian atmosphere, Roger Torraway's body must be replaced with an artificial one. At every step he becomes more and more disconnected from humanity, unable to feel things in his new body. It is only after arriving on Mars that his new body begins to make sense to him. It is perfectly adapted to this new world and he becomes perfectly separated from his old world and from humanity.
The success of the Martian mission spurs similar cyborg programs in other spacefaring nations. It is revealed that the computer networks of Earth have become sentient and that ensuring humanity's survival will guarantee theirs as well. In the end, the network is puzzled; something has distorted their extrapolations, the same way they influenced humanity.


## Reception
New York Times reviewer Gerald Jonas received the novel unfavorably, saying "Pohl seems to have lost his touch entirely. . . . the social extrapolation in Man Plus is simple-minded and the irony heavy-handed."[6] Spider Robinson found Man Plus to be "tight, suspenseful, at times gruesomely fascinating," but faulted it for "one dumptruck-sized hole" in its plotting.[7]
C. Ben Ostrander reviewed Man Plus in The Space Gamer No. 8.[8] Ostrander commented that he "recommends this book for all those who enjoy fast paced, action stories".[8]


## Sequel
Pohl teamed up with Thomas T. Thomas to write a sequel, Mars Plus, published in 1994.[9]


## References
^ "Publication: Man Plus".
^ Source: WorldCat entry on "Man plus"
^ Pohl, Frederik (1976). Man Plus. Random House. ISBN 0-394-48676-5. (Note: unless otherwise noted, all statements in this article regarding the contents of Man Plus are based on the book itself).
^ Science Fiction and Fantasy Writers of America, Inc. (December 3, 2006). "Nebula Awards Past Winners". Archived from the original on October 13, 1999. Retrieved January 11, 2007.
^ Locus Index to SF Awards Archived 2015-02-25 at the Wayback Machine
^ "Of Things to Come", The New York Times Book Review, October 17, 1976
^ "Galaxy Bookshelf", Galaxy Science Fiction, May 1977, p.142
^ a b Ostrander, C. Ben (October–November 1976). "Books". The Space Gamer (8). Metagaming: 16.
^ Pohl, Frederik; Thomas T. Thomas (1994). Mars Plus. Baen Books. ISBN 0-671-87605-8.


## External links
Man Plus at Worlds Without End

v
t
e
Dune by Frank Herbert (1966)
Babel-17 by Samuel R. Delany / Flowers for Algernon by Daniel Keyes (1967)
The Einstein Intersection by Samuel R. Delany (1968)
Rite of Passage by Alexei Panshin (1969)
The Left Hand of Darkness by Ursula K. Le Guin (1970)
Ringworld by Larry Niven (1971)
A Time of Changes by Robert Silverberg (1972)
The Gods Themselves by Isaac Asimov (1973)
Rendezvous with Rama by Arthur C. Clarke (1974)
The Dispossessed by Ursula K. Le Guin (1975)
The Forever War by Joe Haldeman (1976)
Man Plus by Frederik Pohl (1977)
Gateway by Frederik Pohl (1978)
Dreamsnake by Vonda N. McIntyre (1979)
The Fountains of Paradise by Arthur C. Clarke (1980)
Timescape by Gregory Benford (1981)
The Claw of the Conciliator by Gene Wolfe (1982)
No Enemy But Time by Michael Bishop (1983)
Startide Rising by David Brin (1984)
Neuromancer by William Gibson (1985)
Ender's Game by Orson Scott Card (1986)
Speaker for the Dead by Orson Scott Card (1987)
The Falling Woman by Pat Murphy (1988)
Falling Free by Lois McMaster Bujold (1989)
The Healer's War by Elizabeth Ann Scarborough (1990)
Tehanu: The Last Book of Earthsea by Ursula K. Le Guin (1991)
Stations of the Tide by Michael Swanwick (1992)
Doomsday Book by Connie Willis (1993)
Red Mars by Kim Stanley Robinson (1994)
Moving Mars by Greg Bear (1995)
The Terminal Experiment by Robert J. Sawyer (1996)
Slow River by Nicola Griffith (1997)
The Moon and the Sun by Vonda N. McIntyre (1998)
Forever Peace by Joe Haldeman (1999)
Parable of the Talents by Octavia E. Butler (2000)
Darwin's Radio by Greg Bear (2001)
The Quantum Rose by Catherine Asaro (2002)
American Gods by Neil Gaiman (2003)
Speed of Dark by Elizabeth Moon (2004)
Paladin of Souls by Lois McMaster Bujold (2005)
Camouflage by Joe Haldeman (2006)
Seeker by Jack McDevitt (2007)
The Yiddish Policemen's Union by Michael Chabon (2008)
Powers by Ursula K. Le Guin (2009)
The Windup Girl by Paolo Bacigalupi (2010)
Blackout/All Clear by Connie Willis (2011)
Among Others by Jo Walton (2012)
2312 by Kim Stanley Robinson (2013)
Ancillary Justice by Ann Leckie (2014)
Annihilation by Jeff VanderMeer (2015)
Uprooted by Naomi Novik (2016)
All the Birds in the Sky by Charlie Jane Anders (2017)
The Stone Sky by N. K. Jemisin (2018)
The Calculating Stars by Mary Robinette Kowal (2019)
A Song for a New Day by Sarah Pinsker (2020)
Network Effect by Martha Wells (2021)
A Master of Djinn by P. Djèlí Clark (2022)
Babel, or the Necessity of Violence by R. F. Kuang (2023)
The Saint of Bright Doors by Vajra Chandrasekera (2024)
Someone You Can Build a Nest In by John Wiswell (2025)
v
t
e
Undersea Quest (1954)
Undersea Fleet (1956)
Undersea City (1958)
Gateway (1977)
Beyond the Blue Event Horizon (1980)
Heechee Rendezvous (1984)
The Annals of the Heechee (1987)
The Gateway Trip (1990)
The Boy Who Would Live Forever: A Novel of Gateway (2004)
The Other End of Time (1996)
The Siege of Eternity (1997)
The Far Shore of Time (1999)
Man Plus (1976)
Mars Plus (1994) (with Thomas T. Thomas)
Farthest Star (1975)
Wall Around a Star (1983)
The Reefs of Space (1964)
Starchild (1965)
Rogue Star (1969)
The Space Merchants (1953) (with Cyril M. Kornbluth)
The Merchants' War (1984)
Venus, Inc. (1985 Omnibus) (this is a two-in-one volume containing The Space Merchants and The Merchants' War)
Search the Sky (1954) (with Cyril M. Kornbluth)
Gladiator-At-Law (1955) (with Cyril M. Kornbluth)
Preferred Risk (1955) (with Lester del Rey)
Slave Ship (1956)
Presidential Year (1958) (with Cyril M. Kornbluth)
Wolfbane (1959) (with Cyril M. Kornbluth)
Drunkard's Walk (1960)
A Plague of Pythons (1964)
The Age of the Pussyfoot (1965)
Day Million (1970)
The Best of Frederik Pohl (1975)
Jem (1979)
The Cool War (1981)
Syzygy (1981)
Starburst (1982)
The Years of the City (1984)
Black Star Rising (1985)
The Coming of the Quantum Cats (1986)
Terror (1986)
Chernobyl (1987)
Land's End (1988) (with Jack Williamson)
The Day the Martians Came (1988)
Narabedla Ltd. (1988)
Homegoing (1989)
The World at the End of Time (1990)
Outnumbering the Dead (1990)
Stopping at Slowyear (1991)
The Singers of Time (1991) (with Jack Williamson)
Mining the Oort (1992)
The Voices of Heaven (1994)
O Pioneer! (1998)
The Last Theorem (2008) (with Arthur C. Clarke)
All the Lives He Led (2011)


URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Michaelmas_(novel)
Content:

Michaelmas (1977) is a science fiction novel by American writer Algis Budrys,[1] first published as a serial in The Magazine of Fantasy & Science Fiction in August and September 1976, and published in revised form as a novel in 1977. Michaelmas is largely about a renowned newsman who in fact controls, rather than simply reports events thanks to his AI creation "Domino". The protagonist and narrative are loosely based on the world-protector Archangel Michael, while the book contains convincing near-future technology.


## Publication
Michaelmas first appeared in the form of a two-part serial in Fantasy & Science Fiction in August and September 1976. It was published as a novel (in revised form) from Berkley Putnam in 1977, with a simultaneous British edition from Gollancz. A book club edition appeared in 1978, along with the mass-market paperback edition from Berkley. A Questar (Popular Library) paperback reprint appeared in 1986.


## Story
The novel is set in the near future (at least at the time of writing, now actually in past time).
The public image of the eponymous protagonist, Laurent Michaelmas, is that of a world-renowned newsman. In fact, Michaelmas controls world events just as much as he reports them. His means of influence is an immensely powerful self-aware artificial intelligence called Domino, which originated as a modest telephony appliance in Michaelmas' youth. Over the years, Domino has evolved into a digital omnipresence that can penetrate and control any electronic or computerized equipment, most notably communication networks of all kinds. Domino was created by Michaelmas, and its existence is known only to him.
Domino is also the confidante and intellectual sparring partner of Michelmas, compensating in part for the loss that Michaelmas suffered when his wife was killed in an accident many years ago.
By the time of the novel, Laurent Michaelmas has successfully used his power to create and sustain world peace. One of his achievements is the success of UNAC (the fictitious United Nations Astronautics Commission). Organizing space travel as a joint international project, UNAC is important to Michaelmas as a symbol of a more united world. When an astronaut believed to have been killed in a failed mission turns up miraculously saved, a threatening scenario starts to unfold. As the novel progresses, Michaelmas slowly learns that a possible extraterrestrial presence may be interfering with the new world he has worked so hard to create.


## Themes
The novel is not only a fast-paced political/sci-fi thriller, but is also remarkable for its prescience, because it appeared less than a decade into the Internet era, long before its current prominence and ubiquity. The technical descriptions of near future technologies are very convincing and apparently well researched. Its description of journalism and its professional culture are likewise highly developed, mainly due to the late Budrys' residence near Northwestern University's Medill School of Journalism, which appears several times in the book.
Throughout the book, many references are made to classical works of art, theater, poetry and philosophy.
The main character, Laurent Michaelmas, bears the name of the festival honoring the Archangel Michael, a figure in Judaism that protects God's people, and in Christianity that defeats Satan in the Book of Revelation. In the novel, Michaelmas helps to protect society from itself by influencing the balances of power in the world to avoid war and maintain relative peace.


## Related works
The novel incorporates features of a substantially shorter and significantly different version published in The Magazine of Fantasy & Science Fiction in 1976.


## References
^ "MICHAELMAS by Algis Budrys ‧ RELEASE DATE: July 5, 1977". Kirkus Reviews. July 1, 1977. Retrieved November 28, 2024.


## External links
Michaelmas title listing at the Internet Speculative Fiction Database
Michaelmas at Open Library
Michaelmas as serialized in The Magazine of Fantasy & Science Fiction, parts one and two, at the Internet Archive


URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Ophiuchi_Hotline
Content:

The Ophiuchi Hotline is a 1977 science fiction novel by American writer John Varley. It was nominated for a Locus Award.[1] Part of his Eight Worlds series, the novel opens in the year 2618.


## Plot summary
Prior to the beginning of the story, humanity has been expelled from Earth by powerful aliens known as "the Invaders", and scattered across eight planets and satellites of the Solar System, the so-called Eight Worlds. The Invaders originate from a gas giant planet, and have occupied Jupiter, forbidding human access to it. Human expansion to the Eight Worlds has been aided by a broadcast of information from outside the Solar System, named "The Ophiuchi hotline" after the constellation Ophiuchus from which it appears to originate. The information received from this includes extensive material on biological modification, and while sex changes and other modifications have become routine surgeries, experimentation with human DNA remains taboo and forbidden on penalty of death. Related to this, while technology has been developed to allow people to back-up their memories, this is only permitted for implantation within a cloned body in case of death. Due to resource scarcity, only one clone of a person is allowed to exist at any one time, and, similarly, reproduction is restricted to one child per person. An exception exists for those people who join the artificially-created symbionts that can live openly in the vacuum of space.
The protagonist, Lilo, has experimented with human DNA and, when discovered, is sentenced to death. However, the night before her execution, a powerful lunar politician named Tweed offers her the chance to escape her sentence by replacing her with a clone killed in her place. Lilo accepts and Tweed takes her into hiding.
Tweed is the leader of a movement that intends to expel the Invaders and recover Earth, and makes Lilo join this movement under the watch of Vaffa, a guard who has multiple illegal clones, both male and female. Lilo attempts to escape twice, but each time she is killed by Vaffa, and a clone is revived with her original memories.
The third clone of Lilo is sent to an outlying moon of Jupiter, Poseidon, within which Tweed pursues clandestine research performed by illegal clones. Lilo bonds with Cathay, the teacher of the colony's children, and they become lovers. She is given a null-field suit — a conforming forcefield with an air generator that protects her from the vacuum — and is tasked with researching how to kill creatures that live in Jupiter's atmosphere. She reveals to Cathay that, when she began her original experiments, she put a clone of herself and a backup of her memories in a secret base in Saturn's rings, to ensure her survival in the event that she was executed.
Tweed then acquires a micro black hole with the intention of passing it through Jupiter in an attack on the Invaders. Lilo and Cathay board the ship transporting the black hole and seize it. After a struggle, Lilo and a Vaffa clone fall towards Jupiter. Vaffa dies, but Lilo encounters an Invader and is taken to a future version of Earth almost devoid of humanity.
Tweed then awakens another version of Lilo and sends her with a clone of Vaffa to Pluto to research a new message coming from the Ophiuchi Hotline. This one has been translated as a payment demand for the information that humanity has received, but does not specify what form the payment is to take. Lilo and Vaffa find a second clone of Cathay, and the three of them are tasked to lease a ship from navigators dedicated to hunt for black holes, and go beyond the orbit of Pluto to analyze the message. They eventually hire Javelin, one of the most successful black hole hunters.
Once in space, Javelin reveals that the black hole hunters have discovered that the beam of the Hotline originates from a point only half a light-year away from the solar system, scrambled to seem to come from much farther, and she will take them to the source of the beam. However, since the trip will take 20 years Lilo, Vaffa and Cathay go in hibernation.
In the meantime, the first clone of Cathay uses the stolen ship to reach Lilo's base. There he meets Parameter/Solstice, a human-symbiont pair who also know the location of the base. They revive the clone and use the ship to attack Poseidon, taking it out of orbit and destroying its security systems. To do this they crash Lilo's base into a black hole held in a force field on the moon's surface. They carry out a plan to transform the asteroid into a ship to travel to Alpha Centauri, but reveal Tweed's dangerous activities to the Eight Worlds, forcing Tweed to go into hiding.
When Javelin's ship and its passengers reaches the source of the Hotline, they are greeted by seemingly-human extraterrestrials who have been expecting them. They explain that most races in the universe have experienced a similar history with the Invaders: they are expelled from their home planets by the Invaders; they attempt to recover their planets by force, much as Tweed has been doing; and in the ensuing conflict they are driven out of their solar systems entirely. The extraterrestrials have been broadcasting information via the Ophiuchi Hotline to give humanity the tools they need for survival, and the price they ask in exchange is to be allowed to live alongside and within the minds of humans, so that they can add humanity's experience and thoughts to their own pool of knowledge. They suggest that, if humanity does not comply, they will turn the symbionts into an army that will attack humanity on the Eight Worlds.
The clone of Lilo previously transported to Earth spends 25 years there. Because of her null-field suit which she can turn on at will, she is worshipped as a god by the surviving humans scratching out a living at a pre-industrial technological level. During a dive to hunt a whale, she encounters an Invader, somehow steals a silver cube from it and is instantaneously transported to the source of the Hotline. There she meets her clone, and they find that the memories and knowledge of all of their clones, including those killed by Tweed, are somehow mixed and shared between them.
Somewhat surprised by this turn of events, the extraterrestrials explain that the silver cube is a singularity that can be used for space propulsion by canceling inertia. They add that the Invaders only give such a "gift" to races when they're preparing to expel them entirely from their home planetary system. Confronted with this news, Javelin, Cathay, Vaffa and both clones of Lilo return to the solar systems to alert humanity.
As the novel concludes, the clone of Lilo traveling in the asteroid towards Alpha Centauri meditates on her shared memories, and realizes that when she arrives there her fellow clones, and most of humanity, will be already be there waiting for her, having used the singularity for faster travel.


## Characters
In the novel, characters can be cloned and change sex. Memories can be recorded and played back into a new clone, allowing a kind of immortality. It is illegal for more than one copy of a person to exist. Certain crimes, including illegal cloning, result in "permanent death" where all clones and personality recordings must be destroyed. Criminals are tossed into the gravity well of a black hole that supplies the Lunar society with energy.
Lilo, an initially wealthy and successful bio-engineer. Sentenced to permanent death for experimenting with human DNA in foods such as "bananameat", she is cloned several times, killed in various ways, and plays a principal role in the novel.
Boss Tweed, a human politician, leader of the "Free Earth" party. "He" assumes the appearance of the original Boss Tweed, with period clothes and a body that has rolls of fat, in contrast to the sculpted and perfected bodies of the people around him. Tweed runs a clandestine organization using illegal clones, who dare not betray him because they will be killed if discovered. The object of his organization is to reclaim Earth for humanity. He is ruthless with his captives, killing them if they escape or fail him, since he can revive another copy of them at will. When exposed he goes underground by casting off all clothes and the fake body fat, revealing a nondescript individual with no gender at all.
Vaffa, an enforcer for Tweed. Many clones of Vaffa exist, in both male and female forms. Sometimes the females are referred to as "Hygeia". On the Jupiter moon, there are dozens of Vaffa's serving as guards for the kidnapped clones working there. One Vaffa, a female, is sent to Pluto with a Lilo to investigate the new Hotline message. Despite their almost psychotic devotion to Tweed, the Vaffa's can be persuaded to break free with enough indirect persuasion, as when Lilo on Pluto persuades Vaffa to let her go out into the beyond with Javelin. Lilo comes to believe that the original Vaffa was Tweed's child.
Mari, a medical specialist. Body alterations are routine in the society, and can even be done with home kits. Mari does personality recordings, revivals, and tissue grafts that allow Lilo and other clones to pass through society without being detected by their DNA. Mari works with Tweed on Luna, and her clone works on Jupiter's moon Poseidon. She seems totally committed to Tweed. One of Lilo's early clones has to kill Mari during an escape attempt. They had become close friends. Mari is revived as a new clone, and then revives more clones of Lilo as Tweed's schemes develop.
Cathay, a teacher. Cathay is in disgrace as a teacher after the events of another story, "Beatnik Bayou", making him a perfect target for Tweed. One Cathay is on Pluto, while another is on the Jupiter moon Poseidon, teaching children born there. Meeting Lilo on Pluto and on Poseidon sparks instant attraction between them in each case. The Lilo revived by Cathay with help from Parameter/Solstice spurns him at first.
Javelin, a "hole hunter". Hole hunters are solitary individuals who pilot their ships out beyond the edge of the Solar System looking for micro black holes. Most space travelers use "peds", which are limbs ending in large hands, instead of legs. Javelin has gone to extreme lengths, reducing herself to one arm, a much-reduced torso, and a single ped, allowing her to move in confined spaces where her passengers cannot go.
Parameter/Solstice, a symbiont pair living in Saturn's rings. Lilo entrusts them with the location of her emergency backup clone that she hid when she feared being arrested for illegal DNA experimentation.
Iphis, a pilot. There are two clones of Iphis, and two ships set up to look identical. Tweed uses them in a complex deception that allows him to send people and cargo to Jupiter's moons, which would otherwise look suspicious, by having one ship reach Jupiter at the same time as the other leaves to go to the official destination.
Vejay, a scientist on Poseidon. Vejay has a plan to use the black hole that powers the clandestine colony as a rocket to propel Poseidon itself away from Jupiter. However the plan means killing all the Vaffa's, which is impossible. Returning from Saturn with Lilo's backup clone, Cathay jump starts the process by sending Lilo's capsule into the black hole.
The Hotline creators. Although apparently human, they cannot reproduce the necessary body language. Their mannerisms are disturbing to the visitors. One claims to be the product of a group mind millions of years old, and that in interstellar space cultures grow, fragment and absorb one another so that ideas like "species" become meaningless.


## Related stories
"Equinoctial": Parameter pairs with the symbiont she calls Solstice after her first symbiont partner, "Equinox", is taken from her by other pairs as part of a religious war in the rings of Saturn. The pair recover Parameter's lost children and escape the war by moving out to another ring.
"Beatnik Bayou": Cathay educates a young male called Argus by becoming a child of the same age. A confrontation with a pregnant mother in search of a teacher leads to the end of Argus's idyll in a replica of a Louisiana swamp, and to Cathay's disgrace with the Teachers Association, preventing him from teaching more children.
"Goodbye Robinson Crusoe": As a temporary escape from the economic war between Pluto and the rest of the Eight Worlds, the chief economist of Pluto retreats into a manufactured amphibious body with the personality of a young boy, experiencing adventures in a replica of a tropical ocean on Pluto. When the economy unexpectedly gets worse, he has to be found and his personality restored.


## Locations
Luna. Earth's Moon is one of the most populous of the Eight Worlds. Like most human colonies, it is a utopian society living in tunnels and artificial caverns, ruled by a benign artificial intelligence. It is the most conservative in terms of fashion. Reconstructions of Earth environments, known as "disneylands", allow the inhabitants to experience contact with weather, jungles, beaches, animals and plants. The novel uses extracts of "news" to indicate that there are wide variations between educated, semi-literate, and illiterate people in the society.
Pluto. Luna's opposite, a wild frontier society where, at least in terms of body-modification, anything goes. Visitors find themselves surrounded by holograms advertising strange products. They have to buy suppressors to kill the ads. Because of the hours-long communication delay with the rest of the Solar System, Pluto is losing an economic war and undergoing hyperinflation.
Poseidon. One of Jupiter's retrograde moons, probably a captured asteroid, orbiting at a distance of tens of millions of kilometers. The name "Poseidon" was commonly used at the time the novel was written. It is now known as Pasiphae.
Saturn's rings. The two main rings are sparsely inhabited by human/symbiont pairs who need only sunlight and some trace elements to survive. Other Eight Worlds stories describe how the pairs trade works of art for their needs.
Other locations mentioned include Saturn's moon Titan, and Mars.


## See also
Novels portal
List of science fiction novels
Transhumanism


## References
^ "1978 Award Winners & Nominees". Worlds Without End. Retrieved September 26, 2009.


## External links
The Ophiuchi Hotline synopsis, at Worlds Without End
v
t
e
The Ophiuchi Hotline (1977)
Steel Beach (1992)
The Golden Globe (1998)
Titan (1979)
Wizard (1980)
Demon (1984)
Millennium (1983)
Red Thunder (2003)
Mammoth (2005)
The Persistence of Vision (1978)
The Barbie Murders (1980)
Blue Champagne (1986)
The John Varley Reader (2004)
"The Barbie Murders" (1978)
"The Persistence of Vision" (1978)
"Press Enter" (1984)
Millennium (1989)


URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Engine_Summer
Content:

Engine Summer is a novel by American writer John Crowley, published in 1979 by Doubleday. It was nominated for the 1980 National Book Award for hardcover science fiction,[1] as well as both the British Fantasy and John W. Campbell Awards the same year.[2] It was rewritten from Crowley's unpublished first novel, Learning to Live With It.[3] It has been illustrated by Gary Friedman (1979) and Anne Yvonne Gilbert (1983).


## Plot summary
The novel takes the form of an oral history told by a young man named "Rush that Speaks" and of his wandering through a strange, post-apocalyptic world in pursuit of several seemingly incompatible goals. Each of the four divisions of his story are recorded on a separate crystal, and chapters correspond to facets of each crystal.
The story is set in a post-technological future; the present age is dimly remembered in story and legend, but without nostalgia or regret. The people of Rush's world are engaged in living their own lives in their own cultures. Words and artifacts from current time survive into Rush's age, suggesting that it is only a few millennia in the future. Yet there are hints that human society and even human biology are significantly changed. Even such basics as reproduction and eating have been altered, one by industrial-age genetic tampering, the other by contact with extraterrestrial life.
Rush comes of age in Little Belaire, a mazelike village of invisible, shifting boundaries, of secret paths and meandering stories and antique bric-a-brac carefully preserved in carved chests. The inhabitants are divided into clans called "cords" based on personality traits. Over the centuries, the people of Little Belaire have perfected an art which they call "truthful speaking": communication so clear and accurate, so "transparent", as to leave no potential for deception or misunderstanding. Perhaps as a result of this practice, Little Belaire appears to be free of any violence or even serious competition. Another result of truthful speaking is the existence of the "saints", those whose stories speak not only of the specifics of their own lives, but about the human condition. Yet even with the benefit of truthful speaking, secrets and mysteries remain.
Rush's journey is set in motion when the girl he loves, Once a Day, elopes from Little Belaire to join another group, an enigmatic society called Dr. Boots's List. In his search for her, Rush befriends a hermit and an "avvenger" and shares the secrets of the List. Ultimately he discovers a transparent sainthood stranger than any story told by the gossips of Little Belaire.


## Reception
Writing in the New York Times, Frederik Pohl praised Engine Summer, noting, "Mr. Crowley presents his society from the inside, yet his point of view is off‐center, so that the reader learns slowly and never feels secure enough in his knowledge to reduce everything to a glib formula or two. Far from being a didactic social treatise, the novel has strong, believable characters, an ingenious, well‐made plot, and a resolution that is intellectually and dramatically satisfying."[4]
Greg Costikyan reviewed Engine Summer in Ares Magazine #3 and commented that "Engine Summer is pleasant and idyllic."[5]


## List of principal characters
Rush That Speaks – a truthful speaker of Palm Cord
Once A Day – a Whisper Cord girl and Rush’s great friend and beloved
Speak A Word – Rush’s mother
Seven Hands – Rush’s father
So Spoken – Rush’s grandmother
Painted Red – Rush’s first teacher
Blink - Rush’s second teacher and possibly a saint
Sewn Up, No Moon, Budding, Blooming – a family living by the river
Zhinsinura – Rush’s third teacher
Houd – leader of the trading party with whom Once A Day left Little Belaire
Brom – a large intelligent cat
Teeplee – an Avvenger and trader
Mongolfier – a visitor from Laputa


## References
^ "National Book Foundation". Retrieved November 23, 2010.
^ "1980 Award Winners & Nominees". Worlds Without End. Retrieved September 24, 2009.
^ "Great Work Takes Time," Locus, May 2001, pp. 4-5.
^ Jonas, Gerald (May 20, 1979). "Science Fiction". ENGINE SUMMER By John Crowley. Retrieved January 11, 2020.
^ Costikyan, Greg (July 1980). "Books". Ares Magazine (3). Simulations Publications, Inc.: 35.


## External links
Engine Summer at Worlds Without End
Engine Summer title listing at the Internet Speculative Fiction Database
v
t
e
The Deep (1975)
Beasts (1976)
Engine Summer (1979)
Little, Big (1981)
The Translator (2002)
Lord Byron's Novel: The Evening Land (2005)
Four Freedoms (2009)
The Chemical Wedding: by Christian Rosencreutz: A Romance in Eight Days by Johann Valentin Andreae in a New Version (2016)
Ka: Dar Oakley in the Ruin of Ymr (2017)
Flint and Mirror: A Novel of History and Magic (2022)
The Solitudes (1987)
Love & Sleep (1994)
Dæmonomania (2000)
Endless Things (2007)
"Antiquities" (1977)
"Where Spirits Gat Them Home" (1978)
"The Single Excursion of Caspar Last" (1979)
"The Reason for the Visit" (1980)
"The Green Child" (1981)
"Novelty" (1983)
"Snow" (1985)
"The Nightingale Sings at Night" (1989)
"Great Work of Time" (novella, originally published in Novelty, 1989)
"In Blue" (1989)
"Missolonghi 1824" (1990)
"Exogamy" (1993)
"Gone" (1996)
"Lost and Abandoned" (1997)
"An Earthly Mother Sits and Sings" (2000)
"The War Between the Objects and the Subjects" (2002)
"The Girlhood of Shakespeare's Heroines" (2002)
"Little Yeses, Little Nos" (2005)
"Conversation Hearts" (2008)
"And Go Like This" (2011)


URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/On_Wings_of_Song_(novel)
Content:

On Wings of Song is a 1979 science fiction novel by American writer Thomas M. Disch (1940-2008). It was first published as a serial in The Magazine of Fantasy & Science Fiction in three installments in February to April 1979. Like Disch's previous novel 334, it is a bitter satire that depicts a near-future America falling into worsening economic and social crisis. It was critically well received and is often considered Disch's best work. It was, however, a commercial failure.


## Title
"On Wings of Song" is the English title of the German Romantic poem "Auf Flügeln des Gesanges" by Heinrich Heine, which was set to music by Felix Mendelssohn. It speaks of flying with a lover to a peaceful paradise in "the fields of the Ganges".


## Plot summary
The settings are suburban Iowa and New York City, around the middle of the 21st century. Its first section describes the childhood and adolescence of Daniel Weinreb, an imaginative boy who manages to adapt well to his conservative surroundings until a minor act of rebellion sends him to prison at age 14. Daniel's experience there makes him eager to leave the Midwest. After falling in love with the daughter of a powerful and reactionary local tycoon, he moves with her to New York, dreaming of becoming a musician and exploring the forbidden art of "flying"—electronically assisted astral projection. Tragedy and exploitation leave Daniel's idealism in ruins, but he persists and becomes an internationally famous and controversial performer.
Alongside this Bildungsroman storyline, the novel presents a detailed portrait of a future United States torn by economic hardship and culture war. The Midwestern Farm Belt states are ruled by a coalition of the Christian right, known as "undergoders" (a reference to the successful conservative campaign to add the words "under God" to the Pledge of Allegiance); the nominally secular government is socially repressive and business-friendly to an extreme. The coastal states more closely resemble present-day urban America, with generally permissive social attitudes and artistic ferment, but great economic inequality.
The invention of "flying" (which has happened at some unspecified point prior to the beginning of the novel, and is never described in any technological detail) aggravates these cultural divisions. By using a device that seems to be based on biofeedback, while singing with particular verve (an action that, as Disch suggests, causes unique integration of brain activity), a practitioner can separate mind from body and roam the world as an invisible "fairy", able to travel almost without restriction and perceive hidden things. The undergoders regard this as a sinful and dangerous practice, so much so that they discourage musical performance of any kind; but in the coastal cities flying is a fad, so popular that singers are afraid to admit not having been able to achieve it. Many Americans simply refuse to believe that such a radical escape is possible and claim that flying is a hallucination, but still take precautions to avoid being observed by "fairies".


## Literary significance
Harold Bloom listed On Wings of Song in The Western Canon, as did David Pringle in his Science Fiction: 100 Best Novels. John Clute wrote in The Encyclopedia of Science Fiction that it "thematically sums up most of the abiding concerns of TMD's career, as well as presenting an exemplary portrait of the pleasures and miseries of art in a world made barbarous by material scarcities and spiritual lassitude; in the final analysis, however, it lacks the complex, energetic denseness of the earlier book." Author William Gibson described it as "one of the great neglected masterpieces of late 20th-century science fiction."[1] Michael Bishop in A Reverie for Mister Ray writes that the novel "comments on the American predicament by exaggerating its salient stinks...leaving us to walk about in this funhouse future as if it were real. [We are] repeatedly surprised by the vividness with which Disch has rendered our present provincialism, conformity, commercialism, frivolity, intolerance, and narcissism. On Wings of Song is a major accomplishment of American letters."


## Awards and nominations
On Wings of Song won the John W. Campbell Memorial Award in 1980. It was nominated for the 1979 Nebula Award for Best Novel, the 1979 BSFA Award for Best Novel, the 1980 Hugo Award for Best Novel, the 1980 Locus Award for Best Science Fiction Novel, the 1981 Balrog Award, the 1982 Prometheus Award, and was runner-up for the 2004 Premio Ignotus for Best Foreign Novel for the Spanish translation, En alas de la canción.


## References
^ Hand, Elizabeth (2008). "Remembering Thomas M. Disch". Salon. Archived from the original on August 2, 2008. Retrieved October 16, 2015.


## Sources
Rossi, Umberto, "On a Background, Catastrophic, the Story, Ironic: Ecological Awareness and Capitalist Shortsightedness in Thomas M. Disch’s On Wings of Song", Foundation 31:85, Summer 2002, 89-105.


## External links
On Wings of Song title listing at the Internet Speculative Fiction Database
1979 review by Gerald Jonas in New York Times
2004 review
Bibliography with cover scans at Fantasticfiction.co.uk


URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Timescape
Content:

Timescape is a 1980 science fiction novel by American writer Gregory Benford (with unbilled co-author Hilary Foister, Benford's sister-in-law, who is credited as having "contributed significantly to the manuscript").[1] It won the 1981 Nebula and 1980 British Science Fiction Award,[2] and the 1981 John W. Campbell Memorial Award for Best Science Fiction Novel.[3] It won the 1981 Ditmar Award for Best International Fiction.[4] The novel was widely hailed by both critics of science fiction and mainstream literature for its fusion of detailed character development and interpersonal drama with more standard science fiction fare such as time travel and ecological issues.[5]
Pocket Books used the title of this book for their science fiction imprint.


## Plot summary
The story is written from two viewpoints, equidistant from the novel's publication in 1980. The first thread is set in a 1998 ravaged by ecological disasters such as algal blooms and diebacks on the brink of large scale extinctions. Various other events are mentioned in passing, such as student riots and an event of nuclear terrorism against New York City that took place before the events of the novel. This thread follows a group of scientists in the United Kingdom connected with the University of Cambridge and their attempts to warn the past of the impending disaster by sending tachyon-induced messages to the astronomical position the Earth occupied in 1962–1963. Given the faster-than-light nature of the tachyon, these messages will effectively reach the past. These efforts are led by John Renfrew, an Englishman, and Gregory Markham, an American most likely modeled on Benford himself.[6]
The second thread is set at the University of California, San Diego (UCSD), in La Jolla, California in 1962, where a young scientist, Gordon Bernstein, discovers anomalous noise in a physics experiment relating to spontaneous resonance and indium antimonide. He and his student assistant, Albert Cooper (also likely based on the author and his experiences at UCSD), discover that the noise is coming in bursts timed to form Morse code.
The resulting message is made of staccato sentence fragments and jumbled letters, due to the 1998 team's efforts to avoid a grandfather paradox. Their aim is to give the past researchers enough information to start efforts on solving the pending ecological crisis, but not enough that the crisis will be entirely solved (thus making a signal to the past unnecessary and creating a paradox). Due to the biological nature of the message, Professor Bernstein shares the message with a professor of biology, Michael Ramsey. Since the message also gives astronomical coordinates, he also shares it with Saul Shriffer, a fictional scientist who is said to have worked with Frank Drake on Project Ozma. Initially, these characters fail to understand the true meaning of the message. Ramsey believes it to be an intercepted military dispatch hinting at Soviet bioterrorism, while Shriffer thinks the message is of extraterrestrial origin. Shriffer goes public with this theory, mentioning Bernstein in his findings. However, Bernstein's overseer, Isaac Lakin, is skeptical of the messages and wants Bernstein to keep working on his original project and ignore the signal. As a result of this interruption in their experimentation, Bernstein is denied a promotion and Cooper fails a candidacy examination. The signal also exacerbates difficulties in Bernstein's relationship with his girlfriend, Penny.
In 1998, Ian Peterson recovers a safe deposit box in La Jolla containing a piece of paper indicating that the messages were received. Meanwhile, it is clear that the viral nature of the algal bloom is spreading it faster and through more media than originally expected. Strange yellow clouds that have been appearing are said to be a result of the viral material being absorbed through the water cycle, and it soon affects the planet's agriculture as well, resulting in widespread cases of food poisoning. Flying to the United States, Markham is killed in a plane crash when the pilots fly too close to one of the clouds and experience seizures.
In the past storyline, now advanced into 1963, Bernstein refuses to give up on the signals. He is rewarded when the signal noise is also observed in a laboratory at Columbia University (a nod towards the inventor of the tachyon concept, Gerald Feinberg of Columbia). Using hints in the message, Ramsey replicates the conditions of the bloom in a controlled experiment and realizes the danger it represents. Bernstein finds out that the astronomical coordinates given in the message represent where the Earth will be in 1998 due to the solar apex. He also receives a more coherent, despairing message from the future. Having built a solid case, Bernstein goes public and publishes his results.
This decision has monumental consequences. On November 22, a high school student in Dallas is sent by his physics teacher to the Texas School Book Depository to get a copy of Bernstein's findings. There he interrupts Lee Harvey Oswald's assassination attempt on President John F. Kennedy, attacking the shooter and sending the would-be fatal third shot awry. Though seriously injured, Kennedy survives. This paradox creates an alternate universe and forever ends the contact with the original 1998.
The concluding chapters portray the 1998 of the original timeline as a bleak, failing world, the intensified ecological disaster taking a noticeable toll on the human way of life. Peterson retreats to a fortified country farmhouse which he has obviously prepared well in advance. Renfrew continues to send out signals (including the more coherent one that Gordon receives) until the building's generator gives out. Before it does, however, he receives a signal purportedly from the year 2349.
In the final chapter, set in the alternate 1974, an awards ceremony is held for achievement in science. In light of Kennedy's survival, the United States President giving out the awards is William Scranton, who is said to have defeated Bobby Kennedy due to a telephone tapping scandal. The scientists whose work stemmed from the signal are honored, including Bernstein, who receives the Enrico Fermi Prize for his discovery of the tachyon.


## See also
Source of Benford's law of controversy
Thrice Upon a Time (1980), by James P. Hogan
Prince of Darkness (1987), horror film directed by John Carpenter
11/22/63 (2011), novel by Stephen King
SF Masterworks


## References
^ "Gregory Benford, Timescape". SF and Fantasy Masterworks. Retrieved October 31, 2014.
^ "1980 Award Winners & Nominees". Worlds Without End. Retrieved September 18, 2009.
^ "1981 Award Winners & Nominees". Worlds Without End. Retrieved September 18, 2009.
^ 1981 Ditmar Award / Australian Science Fiction Achievement Award at Internet Speculative Fiction Database
^ "Timescape is a genuine marriage of science and literature...Bridging the two cultures of scientists and humanists, it provides an intriguing vision of reality suggested by contemporary physics, and also an absorbing portrayal of people facing challenges both scientific and personal. Benford suggests parallels between the unfamiliar concepts of modern physics that are central to its plot and the familiar human perceptions and problems of its characters. Timescape offers both scientific and humanistic perspectives on the nature of reality." pg 486, Susan Stone-Blackburn
^ "He [Benford] and his twin appear briefly in the La Jolla part of the novel, and he acknowledges a considerable degree of personal identification with Greg Markham.


## External links
Timescape at Worlds Without End
v
t
e
In the Ocean of Night
Timescape
Against Infinity
Across the Sea of Suns
Great Sky River
Foundation's Fear
Eater
The Berlin Project
If the Stars are Gods (with Gordon Eklund)
Heart of the Comet (with David Brin)
Beyond the Fall of Night (with Arthur C. Clarke)
Murasaki (with Poul Anderson, Greg Bear, David Brin, Nancy Kress and Frederik Pohl)
Alternate Empires (with Martin H. Greenberg)
Alternate Heroes (with Martin H. Greenberg)
Alternate Wars (with Martin H. Greenberg)
Alternate Americas (with Martin H. Greenberg)
Nebula Awards Showcase 2000
Gregory Benford bibliography
v
t
e
Dune by Frank Herbert (1966)
Babel-17 by Samuel R. Delany / Flowers for Algernon by Daniel Keyes (1967)
The Einstein Intersection by Samuel R. Delany (1968)
Rite of Passage by Alexei Panshin (1969)
The Left Hand of Darkness by Ursula K. Le Guin (1970)
Ringworld by Larry Niven (1971)
A Time of Changes by Robert Silverberg (1972)
The Gods Themselves by Isaac Asimov (1973)
Rendezvous with Rama by Arthur C. Clarke (1974)
The Dispossessed by Ursula K. Le Guin (1975)
The Forever War by Joe Haldeman (1976)
Man Plus by Frederik Pohl (1977)
Gateway by Frederik Pohl (1978)
Dreamsnake by Vonda N. McIntyre (1979)
The Fountains of Paradise by Arthur C. Clarke (1980)
Timescape by Gregory Benford (1981)
The Claw of the Conciliator by Gene Wolfe (1982)
No Enemy But Time by Michael Bishop (1983)
Startide Rising by David Brin (1984)
Neuromancer by William Gibson (1985)
Ender's Game by Orson Scott Card (1986)
Speaker for the Dead by Orson Scott Card (1987)
The Falling Woman by Pat Murphy (1988)
Falling Free by Lois McMaster Bujold (1989)
The Healer's War by Elizabeth Ann Scarborough (1990)
Tehanu: The Last Book of Earthsea by Ursula K. Le Guin (1991)
Stations of the Tide by Michael Swanwick (1992)
Doomsday Book by Connie Willis (1993)
Red Mars by Kim Stanley Robinson (1994)
Moving Mars by Greg Bear (1995)
The Terminal Experiment by Robert J. Sawyer (1996)
Slow River by Nicola Griffith (1997)
The Moon and the Sun by Vonda N. McIntyre (1998)
Forever Peace by Joe Haldeman (1999)
Parable of the Talents by Octavia E. Butler (2000)
Darwin's Radio by Greg Bear (2001)
The Quantum Rose by Catherine Asaro (2002)
American Gods by Neil Gaiman (2003)
Speed of Dark by Elizabeth Moon (2004)
Paladin of Souls by Lois McMaster Bujold (2005)
Camouflage by Joe Haldeman (2006)
Seeker by Jack McDevitt (2007)
The Yiddish Policemen's Union by Michael Chabon (2008)
Powers by Ursula K. Le Guin (2009)
The Windup Girl by Paolo Bacigalupi (2010)
Blackout/All Clear by Connie Willis (2011)
Among Others by Jo Walton (2012)
2312 by Kim Stanley Robinson (2013)
Ancillary Justice by Ann Leckie (2014)
Annihilation by Jeff VanderMeer (2015)
Uprooted by Naomi Novik (2016)
All the Birds in the Sky by Charlie Jane Anders (2017)
The Stone Sky by N. K. Jemisin (2018)
The Calculating Stars by Mary Robinette Kowal (2019)
A Song for a New Day by Sarah Pinsker (2020)
Network Effect by Martha Wells (2021)
A Master of Djinn by P. Djèlí Clark (2022)
Babel, or the Necessity of Violence by R. F. Kuang (2023)
The Saint of Bright Doors by Vajra Chandrasekera (2024)
Someone You Can Build a Nest In by John Wiswell (2025)
v
t
e
Stand on Zanzibar by John Brunner (1969)
The Jagged Orbit by John Brunner (1970)
Rendezvous with Rama by Arthur C. Clarke (1973)
Inverted World by Christopher Priest (1974)
Orbitsville by Bob Shaw (1975)
Brontomek! by Michael G. Coney (1976)
The Jonah Kit by Ian Watson (1977)
A Scanner Darkly by Philip K. Dick (1978)
The Unlimited Dream Company by J. G. Ballard (1979)
Timescape by Gregory Benford (1980)
The Shadow of the Torturer by Gene Wolfe (1981)
Helliconia Spring by Brian W. Aldiss (1982)
Tik-Tok by John Sladek (1983)
Mythago Wood by Robert Holdstock (1984)
Helliconia Winter by Brian W. Aldiss (1985)
The Ragged Astronauts by Bob Shaw (1986)
Gráinne by Keith Roberts (1987)
Lavondyss by Robert Holdstock (1988)
Pyramids by Terry Pratchett (1989)
Take Back Plenty by Colin Greenland (1990)
The Fall of Hyperion by Dan Simmons (1991)
Red Mars by Kim Stanley Robinson (1992)
Aztec Century by Christopher Evans (1993)
Feersum Endjinn by Iain M. Banks (1994)
The Time Ships by Stephen Baxter (1995)
Excession by Iain M. Banks (1996)
The Sparrow by Mary Doria Russell (1997)
The Extremes by Christopher Priest (1998)
The Sky Road by Ken MacLeod (1999)
Ash: A Secret History by Mary Gentle (2000)
Chasm City by Alastair Reynolds (2001)
The Separation by Christopher Priest (2002)
Felaheen by Jon Courtenay Grimwood (2003)
River of Gods by Ian McDonald (2004)
Air by Geoff Ryman (2005)
End of the World Blues by Jon Courtenay Grimwood (2006)
Brasyl by Ian McDonald (2007)
The Night Sessions by Ken MacLeod (2008)
The City & the City by China Miéville (2009)
The Dervish House by Ian McDonald (2010)
The Islanders by Christopher Priest (2011)
Jack Glass by Adam Roberts (2012)
Ancillary Justice by Ann Leckie and Ack-Ack Macaque by Gareth L. Powell (tie) (2013)
Ancillary Sword by Ann Leckie (2014)
The House of Shattered Wings by Aliette de Bodard (2015)
Europe in Winter by Dave Hutchinson (2016)
The Rift by Nina Allan (2017)
Embers of War by Gareth L. Powell (2018)
Children of Ruin by Adrian Tchaikovsky (2019)
The City We Became by N. K. Jemisin (2020)
Shards of Earth by Adrian Tchaikovsky (2021)
City of Last Chances by Adrian Tchaikovsky (2022)
The Green Man’s Quarry by Juliet E. McKenna (2023)
Three Eight One by Aliya Whiteley (2024)


URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wild_Seed_(Octavia_Butler_novel)
Content:

Wild Seed is a science fiction novel by American writer Octavia E. Butler. Although published in 1980 as the fourth book of the Patternist series, it is the earliest book in the chronology of the Patternist world. The other books in the series are, in order within the Patternist chronology: Mind of My Mind (1977), Clay's Ark (1984), Survivor (1978), and Patternmaster (1976).


## Plot
Wild Seed is the story of two immortal Africans named Doro and Anyanwu. Doro is a spirit who can inhabit other people's bodies, killing anyone and anything in his path, while Anyanwu is a woman with healing powers who can transform herself into any human or animal. When they meet, Doro senses Anyanwu's abilities and wants to add her to one of his seed villages in the New World, where he breeds super humans. Doro convinces Anyanwu to travel with him to America by telling her he will give her children she will never have to watch die. Although Doro plans to impregnate her himself, he also wants to share her with his son Isaac. Isaac has very strong telekinetic powers and is one of Doro's most successful seeds. By partnering Anyanwu and Isaac together, Doro hopes to obtain children with very special abilities.
Doro discovers that when Anyanwu transforms into an animal, he cannot sense her as he can all other super humans. Feeling threatened by her shape-shifting ability, he wonders whether he holds enough control over her. Anyanwu witnesses Doro's barbaric ways and plain disregard for his people, which frightens her. When they arrive at the seed village, Doro tells Anyanwu that she is to marry Isaac, and bear his children and the children of whomever else Doro chooses. Anyanwu eventually agrees once Isaac convinces her that she could be the only one to get through to Doro.
Fifty years later, Doro returns to the seed village. His relationship with Anyanwu has deteriorated, and one of the only things keeping him from killing her is her successful marriage to Isaac. He has come home because he senses that Anyanwu's daughter, Nweke, is fully coming into her powers. During her transition, Nweke attacks Anyanwu. Trying to protect Anyanwu, Isaac accidentally kills Nweke and suffers a heart attack. Anyanwu realizes she is too weak to heal Isaac and he dies. Afraid that Doro will kill her now that Isaac is not there to protect her, Anyanwu transforms into an animal and runs away.
After a century, Doro finally tracks Anyanwu down to a Louisiana plantation. To his surprise, Anyanwu has created her own colony, which in many ways is more successful than Doro's. She protects her people until Doro's arrival, at which point he forces his breeding program on her community. One man he brings to mate with one of Anyanwu's daughters ruins the harmony of the colony, resulting in several deaths. Anyanwu becomes tired of Doro's control, since his immortality makes him the only permanent thing in her life. She decides to commit suicide. Her decision causes Doro to have a change of heart. In desperation, he agrees to compromise as long as she continues to live. From that point on, Doro no longer kills as carelessly to remain immortal, and does not choose his kills from the people that he should be protecting. He also stops using Anyanwu to breed; from now on she helps him in his quest to try to find more promising seeds, but is more of an ally and partner than his slave.


## Characters


### Anyanwu
Anyanwu is the Wild Seed's black female protagonist that is born in an Igbo (or Ibo as Doro says) village in Africa with genetic mutations that endow her with immortality and physical strength. She also possesses a preternatural ability to heal the sick and injured, including herself. Anyanwu is a "shape-shifter," someone who is capable of altering her cells to create a new identity such as a different body, sex, age, or even species− metamorphoses she calls upon when needed to assure her survival. She is viewed as a sort of mythical being living at the outskirts of a village of her people (including her many children) when Doro comes to her. She is only a few hundred years old compared to the few thousands Doro is at the time when they marry. Although she has the ability to do harm, Anyanwu is a highly moral woman with a strong sense of humanity. Important to Anyanwu are family and community, autonomy and companionship, love and freedom, all of which are threatened when she meets Doro.


### Doro
Doro is the story's antagonist. He too is a mutant, born near Egypt, in Kush during the reign of the Pharaohs. As he approaches puberty, Doro learns quite accidentally that he is a "body snatcher," meaning that his life is extended by killing the nearest person to him and subsuming his/her physical body. His immortality, therefore, is fueled by cruelty, and a desire for power and control. Long ago he became singularly fixated on breeding superhumans to form a psionic society that will provide him with the human bodies he needs, as well as sexual partners. Doro's qualities are god-like, inducing members of his society to simultaneously fear and revere him. However, there is no one on earth that can satisfy his need for companionship, until he meets Anyanwu.


### Isaac
Isaac is Doro's favorite son. Isaac is physically human in all respects, but possesses an unmatchable telekinetic ability that Doro foremost desires for his constructed society. Doro successfully schemes to mate his son Isaac with his wife Anyanwu as the progenitors of a new lineage of superhumans. Isaac is very keen on the pairing as he likes Anyanwu a great deal and found her attractive, but she viewed the match as near-incestuous because she was at the time married to Doro, his father. The couple later formed a loving and enduring bond and raised a family together. As Doro's most trusted and respected son, Isaac developed a great rapport with the other inhabitants of Wheatley, one of Doro's seed villages, and was seen as a stand in leader while Doro was away.


### Thomas
Thomas is a sickly, drunken, angry, sullen psionic who lives a hermit's life in the woods. Doro orders Anyanwu to breed with him in order to teach her a lesson about obedience, as well as to produce a highly gifted child.


### Nweke
Ruth Nweke is Anyanwu and Thomas's daughter, and is raised in the household of Anyanwu and Isaac. Nweke is a promising psionic whose powers are so sensitive that they pose a danger. Her transition into psionic adulthood is intense and painful, and its outcome is a setback for Doro's eugenics program.


### Stephen
Stephen Ifeyinwa is Anyanwu's son who lives with her in the South on a plantation. She adores him; he is not a product of Doro's breeding program.


### Minor characters
Okoye is Anyanwu's grandson whom she meets in an African slave port.
Udenkwo is Anyanwu's distant relative. She marries Okoye.
Bernard Daly is Doro's right-hand man in the slave business.
John Woodley is Doro's ordinary son and captain of the slave ship.
Lale Sachs is Doro's "wild" psionic son whom Anyanwu kills in self-defense.
Joseph Toler is a malicious agent planted by Doro in Anyanwu's Louisiana plantation.
Helen Obiageli and Margaret Nneka are Anyanwu's daughters in Louisiana. Margaret did not go through her transition, but as a latent she later marries Joseph (also initially believed to be latent).
Iye is Stephen Ifeyinwa's partner and the mother of his child. Anyanwu does not like her very much initially, but takes her and her children off the street. Eventually she begins to care for Iye as she proves to be a loving and tender mother to Ifeyinwa's child.
Luisa is an elderly woman working for Anyanwu's family on the plantation, Rita is a cook, and Susan is a field hand.


## Themes
She sat staring into the fire again, perhaps making up her mind. Finally, she looked at him, studied him with such intensity he began to feel uncomfortable. His discomfort amazed him. He was more accustomed to making other people uncomfortable. And he did not like her appraising stare—as though she were deciding whether or not to buy him. If he could win her alive, he would teach her manners someday!


### Power struggles
Wild Seed comments on the dynamics of power through the conflict between its protagonists, Doro and Anyanwu. Doro and Anyanwu are both immortals with supernatural abilities, but represent very different worldviews. As a parasitical entity, Doro is a breeder, master, killer, and consumer of lives while, by being grounded in her body, Anyanwu is a nurturing "earth" mother, healer, and protector of life.[2][3]
Seemingly destined to become linked as implied by their names (Doro means "east" and Anyanwu means "sun"),[2] they engage in a clash of wills that lasts over a century. Some critics read their struggle as that between "masculine" and "feminine" perspectives with Doro as the patriarch who controls and dominates his people and Anyanwu as the matriarch who nurtures and protects her own.[4] Others see their relationship as resembling that of master and slave. Doro's first assessment of Anyanwu, for example, is as valuable "wild seed", whose genes will enhance his breeding experiments and so decides to "tame and breed her."[3] This master/slave dynamic becomes complicated once Anyanwu refuses to be submissive to Doro's requests and protects his people against him. Toward the end of the novel, Doro realizes he cannot bend Anyanwu's will and, admitting her worth, he relents some of his absolute power in order to reconcile with her.[2][4]


### Eugenics
He had to have the woman. She was wild seed of the best kind. She would strengthen any line he bred her into, strengthened it immeasurably.
In spite of its classification as fantasy fiction, Wild Seed has been considered as a major exponent of Butler's interest in eugenics as a means to further human evolution. Butler herself characterized the novel as "more science fiction than most people realize" because Anyanwu's shapeshifting and healing powers make her a medical expert.[5]
Maria Aline Ferreira goes further, describing both Doro and Anyanwu as "protogenetic engineers" whose deep understanding of how the human body functions help them remake themselves and transform others.[6]
For Andrew Schapper, Wild Seed is an entry point to the "ethics of controlled evolution" that permeate Butler's novels, most obviously in the Xenogenesis trilogy. As an early novel on the subject, Wild Seed betrays Butler's anxiety that eugenic manipulation and selective breeding could lead to an unethical abuse of power and thus she counters it with a "Judeo-Christian ethical approach to the sanctity of human life" represented by the character of Anyanwu.[7]
Gerry Canavan argues that Wild Seed challenges conventional fantasies of race by having Doro's eugenics project supersede that of Europe's by millennia. In this "alternate history," "America itself--now transformed into a blip between the secret history of Doro's experiments and the brutal aftermath of their horrible success--becomes retold here as an African story, in an Africanist recentering of history that serves as a strongly anti-colonialist provocation, even if the results are mostly anti-utopian." Still, while Doro's eugenic project turns out a "superpowered blackness" that negates notions of white supremacy, his exploitation of his people as mere genetic experiments echoes the breeding methods of New World slave owners, thus replicating the actual history of racial slavery practiced by the Western world.[8]


### Anyanwu as strong black female protagonist
Anyanwu had too much power. In spite of Doro's fascination with her, his first inclination was to kill her. He was not in the habit of keeping alive people he could not control absolutely. ... In her dolphin form, and before that in her leopard form, Doro had discovered that his mind could not find her.
As Butler scholar Ruth Salvaggio explains, Wild Seed was published at a time where strong black female protagonists were virtually nonexistent outside of Butler's novels.[9] By creating the powerful character of Anyanwu, Butler's portrayal superseded stereotypes of women in the science fiction genre.[10] Lisbeth Gant-Britton describes Anyanwu as "a prime example of the kind of heroines Butler depicts. Strong-willed, physically capable, and usually endowed with some extra mental or emotional ability...they nonetheless must often endure brutally harsh conditions as they attempt to exercise some degree of agency."[11]
Anyanwu's story is also an important contribution to women's literature in that it illustrates how women of color have survived both gender and racial oppression. As Elyce Rae Helford explains, "[b]y setting her novel in a realistic Africa and America of the past, [Butler] shows her readers the strength, the struggles, and the survival of black women through the slave years of United States history."[4]
Like many of Butler's strong female African-American characters, Anyanwu is put in conflict with a male character, Doro, who is just as powerful as her. Butler uses this type of mis-match to display how differently males and females demonstrate their power and values.[2] Since Anyanwu's way, J. Andrew Deman notes, "is the way of the healer" rather than of the killer,[10] she does not need violence to demonstrate her true strength or power. As Gant-Britton states, Anyanwu's true power is shown many times during the story but it is definitely displayed when she threatens to commit suicide if Doro does not stop using her to create new species, making Doro submissive "to her will in the name of love," if only for a moment.[11]


### Wild Seedas alternative feminist narrative
Anyanwu wished she had gods to pray to, gods who would help her. But she had only herself and the magic she could perform with her own body.
Though published in 1980, Wild Seed diverts from the typical Second Wave "future utopia" narrative that had dominated the feminist science fiction of the 1960s and 1970s.[12] As L. Timmel Duchamp argues, Wild Seed as well as Kindred provided an alternative to the "white bourgeois narrative, premised on the notion of sovereign individualism" that feminist writers had been using as the prototype for their liberation stories. By not following the "all-or-nothing struggle" of Western fiction, Wild Seed better represented the hard compromises that real women must accept to live in a patriarchal, oppressive society.[3]


### Control
Doro's character plays an important role in the novel because he has total control over all of the other characters. Part of the reason that Doro has so much control is because he determines whether one lives or dies. Doro has the gift and curse of being able to take on the body of anyone he desires. This is a gift because it facilitates his immortality, but it is a curse because when a host body gets old, he must discard and replace it in order to live; for Doro to survive, he must kill. This causes the other characters to be very wary around Doro because they know that he can end their lives at any moment. Doro’s control also derives from his maleness. Being a man in a male-dominated society makes it much easier for him to control women, even Anyanwu. Anyanwu is physically strong enough to fight Doro, but there are times where she does not retaliate against his physical abuse. Doro uses sex to draw women close to him and to create an emotional bond that makes it hard for them to leave.[citation needed]


### Anyanwu as a representation of cyborg identity
Scholars view the shapeshifting Anyanwu as a fictional representation of Donna Haraway's "cyborg" identity as defined in her 1985 essay "A Cyborg Manifesto". Specifically, Anyanwu embodies Haraway's "lived social and bodily realities in which people are not afraid of their joint kinship with animals and machines, not afraid of permanently partial identities and contradictory standpoints" as her shapeshifting abilities compete with Doro's genetic engineering.[12][13] Anyanwu's hybridity, her capability to represent multiple simultaneous identities, allows her to survive, to have agency, and to remain true to herself and her history in the midst of excruciating oppression and change.[12]
Stacy Alaimo further argues that Butler uses the "utterly embodied" Anyanwu not just to counteract Doro's "horrific Cartesian subjectivity" but to actually transgress the dichotomy between mind and body, as Anyanwu is capable of "reading" other bodies with her own. As such, she illustrates Haraway's concept of "situated knowledge", wherein the subject (knower) does not distance itself from the object (known) and thus offers an alternative way of experiencing the world. Anyanwu's body, then, is a "liminal space" that blurs traditional divisions of the world into "nature" and "culture".[14]
For Gerry Canavan, Anyanwu's obvious pleasure and joy in cannibalizing the Other into the Self (especially animals, and particularly, dolphins) presents us with an alternative to the cycle of violence and desire for power offered by the superhuman Patternists (and, by metaphoric extension, human history). Hers is a communion with Otherness that allows for an expansion of consciousness rather than the mere repetition of patterns of domination.[8]


### Afrocentrism/Afrofuturism
At the time of its publication, Wild Seed was considered groundbreaking, as no other African viewpoint—nor African protagonist—existed in the science fiction genre. Butler's novel is minimalistic in its West African backdrop, but nevertheless manages to convey the rich ethos of Onitsha culture through its Igbo heroine, Anyanwu.[15] In particular, Wild Seed is concerned with African kinship networks.[2]
In addition to its Afrocentric point of view, Wild Seed has also been classified as an Afrofuturistic text. As Elcye Rae Helford contends, the novel is part of Butler's larger project to "depict the survival of African-American culture throughout history and into the future."[4] Indeed, as the origin story of the Patternist series, which follows the exploits of a race of genetically-mutated black superhumans who eventually rule Earth in the 27th century, Wild Seed revises our sense of human history as directed by white supremacy.[8]


### Commentary on New World slavery
Wild Seed represents and comments on the history of plantation slavery in the United States. Scenes in the novel depict the capture and sale of Africans; the character of European slave traders; the Middle Passage; and plantation life in the Americas.[16] Doro also resembles a slave master because his program of forced reproduction aims to produce individuals who are exceptional at the cost of degrading the humanity of its participants.[8]
Additionally, the relation between the novel's two main characters, Anyanwu and Doro, may be said to comment on aspects of the slave trade. Anyanwu is coerced out of her home and transported to the Americas to breed offspring on Doro's behalf. Thus, Doro has been interpreted as symbolizing the control exercised over place and sexuality in the slave trade and Anyanwu as symbolizing the colonized and dominated native populations.[10] Anyanwu's conflicts with Doro also illustrate the emotional and psychological consequences of slavery and the possibilities of slave agency in Anyanwu's resistance to Doro's control.[4]


### Animality
In Wild Seed, Butler portrays the distinction between animal and human as fluid. Anywanwu possesses the magical ability to transform into any animal she wishes, after she has tasted its flesh. Her entrance to the animal realm offers an escape from the violence and domination implicit in human social and sexual relations. [citation needed] For instance, after adopting a dolphin's form, the narrator observes, "She could remember being bullied as a female animal, being pursued by persistent males, but only in her true woman-shape could she remember being seriously hurt by males--men...Swimming with [the dolphins] was like being with another people. A friendly people. No slavers with brands and chains here. No Doro with gentle, terrible threats to her children, to her."[17]


### Patriarchy and Western modernity
In their initial encounter, Butler does the work of historicizing the past of both Doro and Anyanwu. Butler does this not as a medium to change the tides of history, but to ultimately work through the ways in which Western modernity employs racialization, as well as patriarchy, to build and maintain colonial projects.
The "history" of Doro's reproductive colonies in which he calls "seed villages", embodies the rationales of Western modernity. Doro also poses these "seed villages" as alternatives to Western modernity, more specifically slavery and colonization. As we see, the moment Anyanwu agrees to Doro's continuation of his colonial project, she agrees to a patriarchal system of governance that controls not only her capacity to reproduce, but also whomever Doro chooses. This control of women's reproduction is not dissimilar from the very same patriarchal governances of reproduction in slavery and colonization. After her agreement, Doro and Anyanwu's relationship is described in a master-slave/, colonizer/colonized dialectic. In this instance, colonization is linked to patriarchal desires, particularly those of control over reproduction.[citation needed]
Further it is the pleasure that Doro receives from breeding that reinscribes his role as a colonizer/master:
"...In the beginning he had gone after them for exactly the same reason wolves went for rabbits. In the beginning, he had bred them for exactly the same reason people bred rabbits...He was building a people who could die, did not know what enemies loneliness and boredom could be."[18]
By describing the monstrosities of Doro's colonial project as stemming from "natural" desires and human propensities, Octavia Butler, in Wild Seed, does the work of creating continuities between the patriarchal projects of the West and Doro's creation of "seed villages". Butler invokes the same pathos used to describe some of most infamous of colonizers/masters (i.e. Christopher Columbus) to rationalize Doro's actions. It is the patriarchal desire in this moment that blurs the distinction between Western modernity and Doro's project.


### Post-colonialism and neo-colonialism
Wild Seed subverts several characteristics of postcolonialism. Postcolonialism suggests that the world has entered a period in which colonization is no longer a reality. It also suggests that colonization ended within the same time frame for both the colonized and the colonizers.[19] Doro is the embodiment of a colonizer. When Doro arrives to a seed village at the beginning of the novel he acknowledges that, "Slavers had been to it before him. With their guns and their greed, they had undone in a few hours the work of a thousand years."[20] Doro has colonized the world with his seed villages thousands of years before Europeans could do the same. Moreover, Doro still operates seed villages and still selectively breeds his people well into the 1800s. Therefore, "Wild Seed" illustrates that colonialism is an ongoing process that does not have a set beginning or ending.
Postcolonialist theory also suggests that anti-colonial and Third World nationalist movements do not exist in the post-colonial era.[19] Anyanwu is the metaphorical Third World in Butler's novel. She does not speak English when she first meets Doro, she maintains the traditions of her homeland, and she has no knowledge of advanced technology. Doro feels the need to civilize her when he brings her to the new world. He gets her to dress in new world styles and gets her to learn English and new world customs. Additionally, Doro uses her to breed children with supernatural powers. In the first half of the novel, Anyanwu is only useful to Doro because she can shape-shift and because her body can adapt to any poison and illness she subjects it to. In this way, Doro is exploiting her for her resources while forcing to act in a Western or "civilized" manner.[citation needed]
A characteristic of Neocolonialism is that Colonial powers continue to exploit the resources of their colonized counterpart for economic or political interests.[19] "Wild Seed" exhibits neocolonialism in the relationship between Doro and Anyanwu and the relationship between Doro and his descendants. Doro uses Anyanwu's children in order to continue his exploitation of her supernatural abilities. He notes that "Her children would hold her even if her husband did not."[21] Anyanwu does not want to endanger her children by attempting to escape or kill Doro. Even after she tries to start a new life on a plantation, he breeds with her to pass on her supernatural abilities to his children. He has a vested interest in her powers, and he refuses to let her go. Anyanwu's children face the same struggle when attempting to escape Doro. Doro threatens them with death in order to keep them under his control. He purposely creates villages for his people so that if they decide to leave they will be left with nothing. They rely on Doro for kinship and protection. In return, Doro uses them for his own gains.


### Revision of origin stories
Scholars have noted that Wild Seed revisits a variety of myths. While most see Doro and Anyanwu's creation of a new race as an Afrocentric revision of the Judeo-Christian story of Genesis,[22] Elizabeth A. Lynn and Andrew Schapper focus on the novel's Promethean overtones,[23] with Lynn comparing it to Mary Shelley's Frankenstein.[23] Finally, John R. Pfeiffer sees in Doro's " voracious... appetite for existence" a reference to the Faust myth and to vampire legends.[24]


## Backgrounds
In an interview, Butler acknowledged that writing Wild Seed helped lighten her mood after finishing the grim fantasy that was her slave narrative Kindred.[25] She became interested in writing a novel about the Igbo (or Ibo) people of Nigeria after reading the works of Nigerian novelist Chinua Achebe.[2] Wild Seed involved a substantial amount of research because Butler had assumed that the Igbo were one people with one language, only to find that they communicated in five dialects.[25]
Among the sources Butler consulted for the African background of her novel were The Ibo Word List, Richard N. Henderson's The King in Every Man and Iris Andreski's Old Wives Tales.[2] A mention in Henderson's book to the Onitsha legend of Atagbusi, who was believed to be able to transform herself into large animals, became the basis for the character of Anyanwu.[22] As Butler told McCaffery and McMenanin,
"Atagbusi was a shape-shifter who had spent her whole life helping her people, and when she died, a market gate was dedicated to her and later became a symbol of protection. I thought to myself, "This woman's description is perfect—who said she had to die?"[25]
In an interview with Rosalie G. Harrison, Butler revealed that making Anyanwu a healer came to her after witnessing a friend dying of cancer.[26]
The character of Doro, Butler revealed in a later interview with Randall Kenan, came from her own fantasies as an adolescent "to live forever and breed people." And while she had already named him, she later discovered that his name in Nubian meant "the direction from which the sun comes" which worked well with her heroine's Igbo name, Anyanwu, which means "the sun".[5]
Butler scholar Sandra Y. Govan notes that Butler's choice of an authentic African setting and characters was an unprecedented innovation in science fiction. She traces Butler's West African backgrounds for Wild Seed to Chinua Achebe's Things Fall Apart and Aye Armah's 2000 Seasons, noting how the novel makes use of West African kinship networks to counteract the displacement of Africans during the Middle Passage and their dispersal once arrived in the New World.[2]


## Reception
Wild Seed received many positive reviews, especially for its style, with the Washington Post's Elizabeth A. Lynn praising Butler's writing as "spare and sure, and even in moments of great tension she never loses control over her pacing or over her sense of story."[23] In his survey of Butler's work, critic Burton Raffel singles out Wild Seed as an example of Butler's "major fictive talent", calling the book's prose "precise and tautly cadence," "forceful because it is focused" and "fictively superbly effective because it is in each and every detail true to the character's lives." In his 2001 book How to Write Science Fiction and Fantasy, famed science-fiction writer Orson Scott Card used passages from Wild Seed's opening paragraphs to illustrate principles of good fiction writing (e.g. how to properly name characters, how to keep the reader intrigued) as well as of good speculative writing (how abeyance, implication, and literalism may work together to produce fantastical realities that are nevertheless believable).[27]
Several reviewers also praised Butler's expertise at conflating fantasy and realism, with Analog's Tom Easton declaring that "Butler's story, for all that it is fiction, rings true as only the best novels can."[28] Noting that "the story itself is eerily fascinating, and well-wrought," Michael Bishop pinpointed that Butler's greatest achievement was her creation of two immortal characters that are nevertheless completely believable as humans, making Wild Seed "one of the oddest love stories you are ever likely to read."[15] Lynn also remarked that "[Butler's] use of history as a backdrop to the struggles of her immortal protagonists provides a texture of realism that an imagined future, no matter how plausible, would have difficulty achieving."[23] John Pfeiffer called it "probably Butler's best novel...a combination of Butler's brilliant fable and real history" and described Doro and Anyanwu as both "epic and authentic, engaging the reader's awe or admiration or sympathy."[16]


## TV Adaptation
In April 2019, news was announced that Nigerian-American writer Nnedi Okorafor would co-write the screenplay of a TV adaptation of Wild Seed with Kenyan filmmaker Wanuri Kahiu for Amazon Prime Video. It will be produced by Viola Davis and Julius Tennon .[29][30]


## References
^ ISFDB. "Publication Listing: Wild Seed." Internet Speculative Fiction Database. ISFDB Engine, n.d. Web.
^ a b c d e f g h Govan, Sandra Y. "Connections, Links, and Extended Networks: Patterns in Octavia Butler's Science Fiction". Black American Literature Forum 18.2 (1984): 82–87.
^ a b c Duchamp, L. Timmel. "‘Sun Woman' or ‘Wild Seed'? How a Young Feminist Writer Found Alternatives to White Bourgeois Narrative Models in the Early Novels of Octavia Butler." Strange Matings: Science Fiction, Feminism, African American Voices, and Octavia E. Butler. Ed. Rebecca J. Holden and Nisi Shawl. Seattle: Aqueduct Press, 2013. 82-95. Print.
^ a b c d e Helford, Elyce Rae. "Wild Seed". Masterplots II: Women's Literature Series (1995): 1-3.
^ a b Kenan, Randall. "An Interview with Octavia E. Butler". Callaloo 14.2 (1991): 495–504.
^ Ferreira, Maria Aline. "Symbiotic Bodies and Evolutionary Tropes in the Work of Octavia Butler." Science Fiction Studies 37.3 (2010): 401-415.
^ Schapper, Andrew (2014). "Eugenics, genetic determinism and the desire for racial utopia in the science fiction of Octavia E. Butler". hdl:11343/41002. {{cite journal}}: Cite journal requires |journal= (help)
^ a b c d Canavan, Gerry. "Bred to Be Superhuman: Comic Books and Afrofuturism in Octavia Butler's Patternist Series." Paradoxa 25 (2013): 253-287.
^ Salvaggio, Ruth. "Octavia Butler and the Black Science-fiction Heroine". Black American Literature Forum 18.2 (1984): 78–81. Web. 02 November 2015.
^ a b c Deman, J. Andrew. "Taking out the Trash: Octavia E. Butler's Wild Seed and the Feminist Voice in American SF." FEMSPEC 6.2 (2005): 6-15.
^ a b Gant-Britton, Lisbeth. "Butler, Octavia (1947– )." African American Writers. Ed. Valerie Smith. 2nd ed. Vol. 1. New York: Charles Scribner's Sons, 2001. 95-110.
^ a b c Holden, Rebecca J. "'I Began Writing About Power Because I Had So Little': The Impact of Octavia Butler's Early Work on Feminist Science Fiction as a Whole (and On One Feminist Science Fiction Scholar in Particular.)" Ed. Rebecca J. Holden and Nisi Shawl. Strange Matings: Science Fiction, Feminism, African American Voices, and Octavia E. Butler. Seattle: Aqueduct Press, 2013. Print.
^ Haraway, Donna. "A Cyborg Manifesto: Science, Technology and Socialist-Feminism in the Late Twentieth Century." In The Cyber cultures Reader. Eds. David Bell and Barbara M. Kennedy. London: Routledge, 2000. 291-324.
^ Alaimo, Stacy. "Skin Dreaming": The Bodily Transgressions of Fielding Burke, Octavia Butler, and Linda Hogan." Ecofeminist Literary Criticism: Theory, Interpretation, Pedagogy. Ed. Greta C. Gaard and Patrick D. Murphy. Urbana: University of Illinois Press, 1998. Print. 123-138.
^ a b Bishop, Michael. Rev. of Wild Seed, by Octavia Butler. Foundation 21 (1981): 86.
^ a b Pfeiffer, John R. "Butler, Octavia Estelle (b. 1947)." In Science Fiction Writers: Critical Studies of the Major Authors from the Early Nineteenth Century to the Present Day. Ed. Richard Bleiler. 2nd ed. New York: Charles Scribner's Sons, 1999. 147-158. Gale Virtual Literature Collection.
^ Butler, Octavia E. Wild Seed. New York: Warner Books, 1980. pg. 91.
^ Butler, Octavia (2007). Seed to Harvest. Grand Central Publishing. pp. 90–91. ISBN 978-0446698900.
^ a b c Shohat, Ella. "Notes on the 'Post-Colonial'". Social Text 31/32 (1992): 99-113.
^ Butler, Octavia E. Wild Seed. New York: Warner Books, 1980. pg. 3.
^ Butler, Octavia E. Wild Seed. New York: Warner Books, 1980. pg. 82.
^ a b Govan, Sandra Y. (1986). "Homage to Tradition: Octavia Butler Renovates the Historical Novel". MELUS. 13 (1/2): 79–96. doi:10.2307/467226. ISSN 0163-755X. JSTOR 467226.
^ a b c d "Vampires, Aliens And Dodos". Washington Post. September 28, 1980. ISSN 0190-8286. Retrieved August 7, 2023.
^ Pfeiffer, John R. "The Patternist Series." Magill's Guide to Science Fiction & Fantasy Literature (1996): 1-3.
^ a b c McCaffery, Larry and Jim McMenamin. "Interview with Octavia Butler." Across the Wounded Galaxies: Interviews with Contemporary American Science Fiction Writers. Urbana: University of Illinois Press, 1990. Print.
^ Harrison, Rosalie G. "Sci-Fi Visions: An Interview with Octavia Butler." In Butler, Octavia E., and Conseula Francis, ed. Conversations with Octavia Butler. Jackson: University Press of Mississippi, 2010. Print.
^ Card, Orson Scott. How to Write Science Fiction and Fantasy. Ohio: Writer's Digest Books, U.S, 2001. 90-100. Print.
^ Easton, Tom. "Review of Wild Seed." Analog Science Fiction/Science Fact 150.1 (5 Jan. 1981): 168. Rpt. in Contemporary Literary Criticism. Ed. Daniel G. Marowski and Roger Matuz. Vol. 38. Detroit: Gale, 1986.
^ "Octavia Butler's "Wild Seed" to Be Adapted for the Small Screen". theportalist.com. April 3, 2019. Retrieved April 23, 2022.
^ "Nnedi Okorafor and Wanuri Kahiu to Adapt Octavia Butler's WILD SEED for Amazon". BOOK RIOT. March 27, 2019. Retrieved April 23, 2022.


## Further reading
Call, Lewis (2001), "Structures of Desire: Postanarchist Kink in the Speculative Fiction of Octavia Butler and Samuel Delany." Anarchism & Sexuality: Ethics, Relationships and Power. Ed. Jamie Heckert & Richard Cleminson. Routledge, 131-153.
Card, Orson Scott (1990). "Books to Look For: Fantasy & Science Fiction February 1990." Hatrack River - The Official Website of Orson Scott Card.
Hampton, Gregory Jerome (2010), Changing Bodies in the Fiction of Octavia Butler: Slaves, Aliens, and Vampires. Lanham, MD : Lexington Books.
Smith, Malaika Daneh (1994), "The African American Heroine in Octavia Butler's Wild Seed and Parable of the Sower." Thesis. U of California, Los Angeles
Whiteside, Briana (2014), Octavia Butler's Uncanny Women: Structure and Characters in The Patternist Series, Thesis
v
t
e
Patternmaster
Mind of My Mind
Survivor
Wild Seed
Clay's Ark
Seed to Harvest
Dawn
Adulthood Rites
Imago
Parable of the Sower
Parable of the Talents
Kindred
Fledgling
"Speech Sounds"
"The Evening and the Morning and the Night"
Bloodchild and Other Stories (collection)
Unexpected Stories (collection)
Earthseed
Octavia E. Butler Landing (Mars rover landing site)


URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Riddley_Walker
Content:

John W. Campbell Memorial Award, Australian Science Fiction Achievement Award
Riddley Walker is a science fiction novel by American writer Russell Hoban, first published in 1980. It won the John W. Campbell Memorial Award for best science fiction novel in 1982,[1] as well as an Australian Science Fiction Achievement Award in 1983.[2] It was nominated for the Nebula Award for Best Novel in 1981.[3]
It is Hoban's best-known adult novel and a drastic departure from his other work, although he continued to explore some of the same themes in other settings.


## Production
Hoban began work on the novel in 1974, inspired by the medieval wall painting of the legend of Saint Eustace at Canterbury Cathedral.[4]


## Plot
Roughly two thousand years after a nuclear war has devastated civilization, Riddley, the young narrator, stumbles upon efforts to recreate a weapon of the ancient world.
The novel's characters live a harsh life in a small area which is presently the English county of Kent, and know little of the world outside of "Inland" (England). Their level of civilization is similar to England's prehistoric Iron Age, although they do not produce their own iron but salvage it from ancient machinery. Church and state have combined into one secretive institution, whose mythology, based on misinterpreted stories of the war and an old Catholic saint (Eustace), is enacted in puppet shows.


## Characters
Riddley Walker, the 12-year-old protagonist
Brooder Walker, Riddley's father who is known for his "connexions" (prophetic stories) and dies early in the story
Lorna, the seer/priest in their village
Abel Goodparley and Erny Orfing, agents of the political-religious government
Eusa, a religious figure portrayed in puppet form
Lissener, titled the Ardship of Cambry, one of the mutant "Eusa folk"


## Language
One of the most notable features of the book is its unique dialect: an imagined future version of the English language. This language blends puns, phonetic spelling, and colloquialisms, and is influenced by the dialects of East Kent as Hoban heard them before 1980, where the book is set.[4] Professor of English John Mullan praised the novel's dialect as an "extraordinary risk" and noted that the language "naturalises the shattered world" of the novel, absorbing and engaging readers.[4] Author Peter Schwenger called the language "quasi-illiterate, largely phonetic," arguing that it "slows us to the pace of an oral culture."[5]
Some features include:
Technological idioms: progam for plan, gallack seas for the heavens, Puter Leat for the computer elite, pirntowt for printout (or conclusion), the Littl Shyning Man the Addom for the atom
Capitalized nouns: Plomercy for diplomacy, Trubba for trouble, Master Chaynjis for changes, or the apocalypse
Phonetic spelling: fizzics for physics, vackt our wayt for evacuated, soar vivers for survivors
Place names: Inland for England, Cambry for Canterbury, Do It Over for Dover, Fork Stoan for Folkestone
Titles: Wes Mincer for Westminster, Pry Mincer for prime minister, Guvner for leader, Ardship of Cambry for Archbishop of Canterbury
Colloquialisms: bye bye hump for burial mound, doing the juicy for sex, Bad Time for nuclear armageddon
Kent dialect: parbly for probably, arnge for orange, barms for bombs


## Critical reception
Peter Ruppert noted that Hoban's novel draws on "such well-known dystopias as A Clockwork Orange, Lord of the Flies, and A Canticle for Leibowitz", and "what is unique in Hoban's haunting vision of the future is his language" which is described as being similar to the Nadsat slang spoken in Anthony Burgess' A Clockwork Orange.[6] The Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists stated that, "The force and beauty and awfulness of Hoban's creation is shattering," and praised the author's use of a crude "Chaucerian English".[7] John Mullan of The Guardian also praised Hoban's decision to narrate the novel in a devolved form of English: "The struggle with Riddley's language is what makes reading the book so absorbing, so completely possessing."[4]
Library Journal wrote that the book holds "a unique and beloved place among the few after-Armageddon classics".[8] It was included in David Pringle's book Science Fiction: The 100 Best Novels. In 1994, American literary critic Harold Bloom included Riddley Walker in his list of works comprising the Western Canon.[9]


## Adaptations


### Film and theatre
Robert C. Cumbow wrote in Slant Magazine that the post-apocalyptic film Mad Max Beyond Thunderdome borrowed "whole ideas, themes and characterizations" from the novel.[10]
Hoban's own theatrical adaptation premiered at the Royal Exchange Theatre, Manchester, in February 1986. It was directed by Braham Murray and starred David Threlfall. Its U.S. premiere was at the Chocolate Bayou Theatre, in April 1987, directed by Greg Roach.[11]
In 1989, Russell Hoban gave permission for theatre students at Sir Percival Whitley/Calderdale College, Halifax, West Yorkshire, to transcribe the book into a theatrical script, which was then staged in a new production at The Square Chapel, Halifax.
In November 2007, the play was produced by Red Kettle in Waterford, Ireland, to positive reviews.[12]
In 2011, the play was also adapted for Trouble Puppet Theater Co. by artistic director Connor Hopkins at Salvage Vanguard Theater in Austin, Texas. This production employed tabletop puppetry inspired by the Bunraku tradition and was supported by an original score by Justin Sherburn.[13]
In March 2015, a group of Aberystwyth drama students performed the play in Theatre y Castell over the course of two days. The production was directed by David Ian Rabey.


### Popular music
"The Rapture of Riddley Walker" is the eighth song on the Clutch album From Beale Street to Oblivion (2007).[14]
"Widder's Dump", named after a location in the book and notes on the credits as being inspired by the novel, is the fifth song on the 1989 King Swamp album.[15]
"In the Heart of the Wood and What I Found There" from the album Thunder Perfect Mind by Current 93 features references to Riddley Walker. Another Current 93 song, "The Blue Gates of Death" from the album Earth Covers Earth incorporates a rhyme from the book. Also, their album Of Ruine or Some Blazing Starre cites the Saint Eustace story.[16]
"Ode to Riddley Walker" is the title track of the second solo album by The Owl Service vocalist Diana Collier (2020). The song refers directly to Hoban's novel.[17]


## See also
Novels portal
Cloud Atlas
The Book of Dave
Engine Summer
Pilgermann


## References
^ "sfadb: John W. Campbell Memorial Award 1982". www.sfadb.com. Retrieved 12 October 2022.
^ "sfadb: Ditmar Awards 1983". www.sfadb.com. Retrieved 12 October 2022.
^ Science Fictions & Fantasy Writers Association (1981). "1981 Nebula Awards". The Nebula Awards. Retrieved 16 January 2025.
^ a b c d Mullan, John (13 November 2010). "Riddley Walker by Russell Hoban". The Guardian. Retrieved 16 January 2012.
^ Schwenger, Peter (1991). "Circling Ground Zero". PMLA. 106 (2): 251–261. doi:10.2307/462661. ISSN 0030-8129. JSTOR 462661.
^ Ruppert, Peter (1999). "Riddley Walker". Utopian Studies. 10 (2). Penn State University Press: 254–255. ISSN 1045-991X. JSTOR 20718123.
^ Messic, Penelope (June 1982). "Penelope Messic reviews Riddley Walker by Russell Hoban". Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists. 38 (6): 49–50. ISSN 0096-3402.
^ Clark, Jeff (July 1981). "Hoban, Russell. Ridley Walker". Book Review. Library Journal. 106 (13): 1443. ISSN 0363-0277.
^ Teeter, Robert. "Bloom. Western Canon". sonic.net. Retrieved 2 October 2019.
^ Cumbow, Robert C. (19 June 2010). "Summer of '85: We Don't Need Another Hero: Mad Max Beyond Thunderdome". Slant Magazine. Retrieved 3 May 2015.
^ Awl, Dave. "Russell Hoban's RIDDLEY WALKER". THE HEAD OF ORPHEUS - A Russell Hoban Reference Page. Retrieved 14 April 2013.
^ "Red Kettle Theatre Company, Waterford: Riddley Walker". red-kettle.com. November 2007. Archived from the original on 18 June 2009. Retrieved 14 April 2013.
^ "Trouble Puppet Theater Co. Archives". troublepuppet.com. 8 November 2011. Archived from the original on 11 September 2014. Retrieved 14 April 2013.
^ Prato, Greg. "From Beale Street to Oblivion - Clutch | Songs, Reviews, Credits". AllMusic. Retrieved 19 July 2012.
^ Allan, Mark. "King Swamp - King Swamp | Songs, Reviews, Credits". AllMusic. Retrieved 19 July 2012.
^ Bishop, Eli (ed.). "Related works". Riddley Walker Annotations. Retrieved 10 December 2017.
^ Kidman, David (18 February 2020). "Diana Collier: Ode To Riddley Walker". Folk Radio. Retrieved 18 December 2022.


## Sources
Ackerley, Chris (2017). "Russell Hoban's Riddley Walker: The Eusa Story and Other Blipful Figgers". In Marshall, Simone Celine; Cusack, Carole M. (eds.). The Medieval Presence in the Modernist Aesthetic. Brill. pp. 169–190. doi:10.1163/9789004357020_012. ISBN 978-90-04-35702-0.
Boyne, Martin (2009). "Sentenced to Destruction: a Stylistic Analysis of the Syntax of Two Post-apocalyptic Novels" (PDF). Working with English: Medieval and Modern Language, Literature and Drama. 5 (1): 1–20. Retrieved 23 May 2021.
Cockrell, Amanda (Spring 2004). "On This Enchanted Ground: Reflections of a Cold War Childhood in Russell Hoban's "Riddley Walker" and Walter M. Miller's "A Canticle for Leibowitz"". Journal of the Fantastic in the Arts. 15 (1): 20–36. JSTOR 43308682.
Dowling, David (1988). "Russell Hoban's Riddley Walker: Doing the Connections". Critique: Studies in Contemporary Fiction. 29 (3): 179–187. doi:10.1080/00111619.1988.9937847.
Eve, Martin Paul (2014). ""some kind of thing it aint us but yet its in us": David Mitchell, Russell Hoban, and Metafiction After the Millennium". SAGE Open. 4 (1): 1–10. doi:10.1177/2158244014521636.
Granofsky, Ronald (1986). "Holocaust as Symbol in Riddley Walker and The White Hotel". Modern Language Studies. 16 (3): 172–182. doi:10.2307/3194897. JSTOR 3194897.
Hannah, Matthew; Mayer, Sylvia (2021). "Scale and Speculative Futures in Russell Hoban's Riddley Walker and Kim Stanley Robinson's 2312". In Hanke, Christine; Milburn, Colin; Hutta, Jan Simon; Cortiel, Jeanne (eds.). Practices of Speculation. Modeling, Embodiment, Figuration. Transcript Verlag. pp. 191–208. ISBN 9783837647518.
Huisman, David (1994). "'Hoap of a Tree' in Riddley Wa'ker". Christianity and Literature. 43 (3–2): 347–373. doi:10.1177/014833319404300309.
Lake, David J. (1984). "Making the Two One: Language and Mysticism in "Riddley Walker"". Extrapolation. 25 (2): 157–170. doi:10.3828/extr.1984.25.2.157.
Maclean, Marie (1988). "The Signifier as Token: The Textual Riddles of Russell Hoban". Journal of the Australasian Universities Language and Literature Association. 70 (1): 211–219. doi:10.1179/aulla.1988.001.
Maynor, Natalie; Patteson, Richard F. (1984). "Language as Protagonist in Russell Hoban's Riddley Walker". Critique: Studies in Contemporary Fiction. 26 (1): 18–25. doi:10.1080/00111619.1984.9933791.
Mullen, R. D. (November 2000). "Dialect, Grapholect, and Story: Russell Hoban's "Riddley Walker" as Science Fiction". Science Fiction Studies. 27 (3): 391–417. doi:10.1525/sfs.27.3.0391. JSTOR 4241511.
Mustazza, Leonard (1989). "Myth and History in Russell Hoban's Riddley Walker". Critique: Studies in Contemporary Fiction. 31 (1): 17–26. doi:10.1080/00111619.1989.9934681.
Porter, Jeffrey (Winter 1990). ""Three Quarks for Muster Mark": Quantum Wordplay and Nuclear Discourse in Russell Hoban's "Riddley Walker"". Contemporary Literature. 31 (4): 448–469. doi:10.2307/1208323. JSTOR 1208323.
Roache, John (2017). "In the Moment of Danger: Benjaminian History and Theology in Russell Hoban's Riddley Walker". Symplokē. 25 (1–2): 355–374. doi:10.5250/symploke.25.1-2.0355. S2CID 148964555.
Schwenger, P. (1991). "Circling Ground Zero". PMLA. 106 (2): 251–261. doi:10.2307/462661. JSTOR 462661. S2CID 163939306.
Schwetman, John W. (1985). "Russell Hoban's Riddley Walker and the Language of the Future". Extrapolation. 26 (3): 212–219. doi:10.3828/extr.1985.26.3.212.
Taylor, Nancy Dew (1989). "'…You Bes go Ballsy': Riddley Walker's Prescription for the Future". Critique: Studies in Contemporary Fiction. 31 (1): 27–39. doi:10.1080/00111619.1989.9934682.
Warren, Martin L. (March 2007). "The St. Eustace Legend as Palimpsest in Hoban's "Riddley Walker"". Science Fiction Studies. 34 (1): 158–163. JSTOR 4241511.


## External links
Russell Hoban on Riddley Walker (The Guardian, 26 November 2010)
Riddley Walker Annotations
The Riddley Walker Concordance
Riddleyspeak: A Bibliography
Gallery: Quentin Blake illustrations for Russell Hoban's Riddley Walker
Photographs of Trouble Puppet Theater Co's production


URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Roderick_(novel)
Content:

Roderick, or The Education of a Young Machine is a 1980 science fiction novel by American writer John Sladek. It was nominated for a Philip K. Dick Award and was followed in 1983 by Roderick at Random, or Further Education of a Young Machine. The two books were originally intended as a single longer novel, and were finally reissued together in 2001 as The Complete Roderick. It was included in David Pringle's book Science Fiction: The 100 Best Novels.


## Plot summary
The title character is an intelligent robot, the first to be invented. The opening chapters describe the creation of Roderick and show his mind (at first consisting of a bodiless computer program) developing through several stages of awareness. Finally, Roderick is given a rudimentary body and, through a series of misadventures, finds himself alone in the world. Due to his sketchy understanding of human customs, and intrigues surrounding the project that created him, he unwittingly becomes the center of various criminal schemes and other unfortunate events.


## Major themes
Though the Roderick books are in many ways serious examinations of philosophical issues surrounding the idea of intelligent machines, their plot is (typically for Sladek) propelled by energetic farce and satire. Nearly every human institution, particularly academia and government, is portrayed as grievously incompetent (the Roderick project itself is originally an elaborate fraud), and the growing computerization of modern society causes no end of trouble for people—though Roderick is able to turn it to his advantage. A running joke throughout is that although Roderick is not particularly human-looking, people are unable to believe that he is a robot or simply fail to notice, and treat him instead as an insane man or a disabled child; but, like Candide or Prince Myshkin (from The Idiot), he never complains and always seeks to please.
The story is also peppered with Sladek's usual puns and word games, and satirical jabs at other science fiction themes, particularly Isaac Asimov's Three Laws of Robotics.


## External links
Roderick or The Education of a Young Machine title listing at the Internet Speculative Fiction Database
Roderick at Random title listing at the Internet Speculative Fiction Database (Not to be confused with Roderick Random, a Middle Ages novel by Tobias Smollett)
Complete Roderick
Annotations for Roderick and Roderick at Random at Nitbar

This article about a 1980s science fiction novel is a stub. You can help Wikipedia by expanding it.
See guidelines for writing about novels. Further suggestions might be found on the article's talk page.
v
t
e


URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Shadow_of_the_Torturer
Content:

The Shadow of the Torturer is a science fantasy novel by American writer Gene Wolfe, published by Simon & Schuster in May 1980.[2] It is the first of four volumes in The Book of the New Sun[1] which Wolfe had completed in draft before The Shadow of the Torturer was published. It relates the story of Severian, an apprentice Seeker for Truth and Penitence (the guild of torturers), from his youth through his expulsion from the guild and subsequent journey out of his home city of Nessus.
In 1987, Locus magazine ranked The Shadow of the Torturer number four among the 33 "All-Time Best Fantasy Novels", based on a poll of subscribers.[3][a]


## Plot summary
Severian, an apprentice in the Torturers' Guild, barely survives a swim in the River Gyoll. On his way back to the Citadel, Severian and several other apprentices sneak into a necropolis where Severian encounters Vodalus, a legendary revolutionary. Vodalus, along with two others, including a woman named Thea, are robbing a grave. Vodalus and his companions are confronted by volunteer guards. Severian saves Vodalus's life, earning his trust and the reward of a single coin.
Shortly before Severian is elevated to journeyman he encounters and falls in love with Thecla, a beautiful aristocratic prisoner. Thecla's crime is never made clear, though it is implied that she is imprisoned for political reasons since Thecla's half-sister is Thea, Vodalus's lover. The Autarch (ruler of the Commonwealth) wishes to use Thecla to capture Vodalus. When finally Thecla is put to torture, Severian takes pity on her and helps her commit suicide by smuggling a knife into her cell, thus breaking his oath to the guild.
Though Severian expects to be tortured and executed, instead the head of the guild dispatches Severian to Thrax, a distant city which has need of an executioner. Master Palaemon gives Severian a letter of introduction to the archon of the city and Terminus Est, a magnificent executioner's sword. He departs the guild headquarters, traveling through the decaying city of Nessus. He finally comes upon an inn, where he forces the innkeeper to take him in despite being full and is asked to share a room with other boarders. His roommates are the giant Baldanders and Dr. Talos, travelling as mountebanks, who invite Severian to join them in a play to be performed the same day. During breakfast, Dr. Talos manages to recruit the waitress for his play and they set out into the streets.
Not intending to participate, Severian parts with the group and stops at a rag shop to purchase a mantle to hide his fuligin cloak (the uniform of his guild, which inspires terror in common folk). The shop is owned by a twin brother and sister, and the brother immediately takes interest in Terminus Est, but Severian refuses to sell the sword. Shortly after, a masked and armoured hipparch enters the shop and challenges Severian to a duel. Severian, who believes this is an indirect means for the Autarch to execute him for his crime, is forced to accept, and he departs with the sister, Agia, to secure an avern, a deadly plant used for dueling. While on their way, urged by Agia's bet to a passing fiacre, their driver crashes into and destroys the altar of a religious order, where Agia is accused of stealing a precious artifact. After Agia is searched and released, they continue their journey to the Botanic Gardens, a large landmark of Nessus created by the mysterious Father Inire, right hand to the Autarch, where they encounter strange hypnotic illusions and at one point appear to be transported to present-day Earth without realizing it.
Inside the gardens, Severian falls into a lake used to inter the dead, and while pulling himself out he finds a young woman named Dorcas to have come up from the lake as well. Dazed and confused, the woman follows Severian and Agia. Severian secures the avern with the help of a man named Hildegrin, who he recognizes as a companion of Vodalus from the night they met in the necropolis. Agia, Severian and Dorcas proceed to an inn near the dueling grounds. While eating dinner, Severian receives a mysterious note warning about one of the women. After dinner, Severian fights in the duel, and though stabbed by the avern he miraculously survives. When Severian wakes again, he finds himself to be in a lazaret. After finding Dorcas and identifying himself, he is requested to perform an execution. The prisoner turns out to be his opponent, Agia's brother, whom he executes after learning that Agia had challenged him in disguise, while her brother fought him with the avern, as part of a scheme to kill him and steal Terminus Est.
Severian continues his travels toward Thrax, and Dorcas accompanies him. While searching his belongings, Severian finds the Claw of the Conciliator. Apparently Agia stole the Claw from the altar they destroyed and placed it in Severian's belongings knowing that she would be searched. Eventually Severian and Dorcas encounter Dr. Talos, Baldanders and an actress named Jolenta, who are almost ready to perform the play they had invited Severian to the morning before. Severian assists in the play, and the next day the group sets out toward the great gate leading out of Nessus, where they meet a man named Jonas. As they are passing through the gate, there is suddenly a commotion and the narration abruptly ends.


## Reception
Greg Costikyan reviewed The Shadow of the Torturer and The Claw of the Conciliator in Ares magazine #9 and commented that "This is fantasy as it should be written; portentous events, marvelous beings, wielders of great powers, a land of terror and delight. If Wolfe never writes another word, he will have made his mark."[4]
Neil Gaiman, in his list of the three greatest science fiction novels, ranked The Shadow of the Torturer first, ahead of Neuromancer and The Left Hand of Darkness.[5]


## Awards
The Shadow of the Torturer won the annual World Fantasy Award and British Science Fiction Association Award as the year's best novel. Among other annual awards for fantasy or science fiction novels, it placed second for the Locus (fantasy), third for the Campbell Memorial (SF), and was a finalist for the Nebula (SF).[6][7][8]


## Limited edition
Centipede Press, a small independent fine press, produced a limited edition of The Shadow of the Torturer in 2007: one hundred copies, signed by Gene Wolfe, with full color artwork by Alexander Preuss of Germany. The $225 book had a ribbon marker, head and tail bands, three-piece cloth construction, and a protective slipcase. It is now out of print.[9]
Easton Press included it in their "Masterpieces of Science Fiction" series, red leather bound, gold stamped and edged, ribbon marker, and printed on acid neutral paper (like all the series) with custom artwork, collector's notes insert, and a custom introduction written by Tom Shippey of Leeds, England. All additional text and artwork are copyright 1989 by Easton press. Unlike some of the works included in the series, the author did not sign the copies printed by Easton Press.[10]


## Comic book
The novel was adapted as a serial comic book, The Shadow of the Torturer by Ted Naifeh (Innovation Publishing, 1991). It was cancelled after three of six planned issues.[11]


## Notes
^ Locus subscribers voted only two Middle-earth novels by J. R. R. Tolkien and A Wizard of Earthsea by Ursula K. Le Guin ahead of Wolfe's The Shadow of the Torturer. Third and fourth ranks were exchanged in the 1998 rendition of the poll, which considered Wolfe's Book of the New Sun and Le Guin's Earthsea series as single entries.


## References
^ a b The Book of the New Sun series listing at the Internet Speculative Fiction Database (ISFDB). Retrieved 2012-04-23.
^ "Publication: The Shadow of the Torturer". Internet Speculative Fiction Database. Retrieved October 12, 2017.
^ "Locus Poll Best All-time Novel Results: 1987, fantasy novels". Locus Online: Books. Locus Publications. Retrieved April 18, 2012. Originally published in the monthly Locus: The Magazine Of The Science Fiction & Fantasy Field, August 1987.{{cite magazine}}: CS1 maint: postscript (link) • An older edition of the website links multiple pages providing the results of several polls and a little other information. "The Locus Index to SF Awards: 1987 Locus All-time Poll". Locus Publications. Archived from the original on January 13, 2004. Retrieved October 12, 2011. {{cite magazine}}: Cite magazine requires |magazine= (help) • See also "1987 Locus Poll Award". ISFDB. Retrieved 2012-04-12.
^ Costikyan, Greg (July 1981). "Books". Ares Magazine (9). Simulations Publications, Inc.: 24.
^ "Neil Gaiman's Top Three Science Fiction Novels". YouTube.
^ "Gene Wolfe" Archived 2008-03-14 at the Wayback Machine. The Locus Index to SF Awards: Index to Literary Nominees. Locus Publications. Retrieved 2012-04-23.
^ "1981 Award Winners & Nominees". Worlds Without End. Retrieved July 6, 2009.
^ "1980 Award Winners & Nominees". Worlds Without End. Retrieved July 6, 2009.
^ "The Book of the New Sun by Gene Wolfe; Centipede Press". J. Davis. March 14, 2011. The Whole Book Experience].
^ "Publication Series: The Masterpieces of Science Fiction".
^ "Ted Naifeh" Archived August 27, 2011, at the Wayback Machine. Revolutionize Comics. Oni Press.


## External links
Gene Wolfe at the Internet Speculative Fiction Database
v
t
e
The Shadow of the Torturer (1980)
The Claw of the Conciliator (1981)
The Sword of the Lictor (1981)
The Citadel of the Autarch (1983)
The Urth of the New Sun (1987)
Nightside the Long Sun (1993)
Lake of the Long Sun (1994)
Caldé of the Long Sun (1994)
Exodus from the Long Sun (1996)
On Blue's Waters (1999)
In Green's Jungles (2000)
Return to the Whorl (2001)
Soldier of the Mist (1986)
Soldier of Arete (1989)
Soldier of Sidon (2006)
The Knight (2004)
The Wizard (2004)
Operation Ares (1970)
The Fifth Head of Cerberus (1972)
Peace (1975)
The Devil in a Forest (1976)
Free Live Free (1984)
There Are Doors (1988)
Castleview (1990)
Pandora, By Holly Hollander (1990)
Pirate Freedom (2007)
An Evil Guest (2008)
The Sorcerer's House (2010)
Home Fires (2011)
The Land Across (2013)
A Borrowed Man (2015)
Interlibrary Loan (2020)
The Island of Doctor Death and Other Stories and Other Stories (1980)
Gene Wolfe's Book of Days (1981)
The Wolfe Archipelago (1983)
Plan(e)t Engineering (1984)
Bibliomen (1984)
Storeys from the Old Hotel (1988)
Endangered Species (1989)
Castle of Days (1992)
The Young Wolfe (1992)
Strange Travelers (2000)
Innocents Aboard (2004)
Starwater Strains (2005)
The Best of Gene Wolfe (2009)
"How I Lost the Second World War and Helped Turn Back the German Invasion" (1973)
"The Death of Doctor Island" (1973)
"Straw" (1975)
"The Woman the Unicorn Loved" (1981)
"A Cabin on the Coast" (1984)
A Walking Tour of the Shambles (2002)
"Memorare" (2007)
Severian
Ascian language
v
t
e
The Forgotten Beasts of Eld by Patricia A. McKillip (1975)
Bid Time Return by Richard Matheson (1976)
Doctor Rat by William Kotzwinkle (1977)
Our Lady of Darkness by Fritz Leiber (1978)
Gloriana by Michael Moorcock (1979)
Watchtower by Elizabeth A. Lynn (1980)
The Shadow of the Torturer by Gene Wolfe (1981)
Little, Big by John Crowley (1982)
Nifft the Lean by Michael Shea (1983)
The Dragon Waiting by John M. Ford (1984)
Mythago Wood by Robert Holdstock / Bridge of Birds by Barry Hughart (1985)
Song of Kali by Dan Simmons (1986)
Perfume by Patrick Süskind (1987)
Replay by Ken Grimwood (1988)
Koko by Peter Straub (1989)
Lyonesse: Madouc by Jack Vance (1990)
Only Begotten Daughter by James K. Morrow / Thomas the Rhymer by Ellen Kushner (1991)
Boy's Life by Robert R. McCammon (1992)
Last Call by Tim Powers (1993)
Glimpses by Lewis Shiner (1994)
Towing Jehovah by James K. Morrow (1995)
The Prestige by Christopher Priest (1996)
Godmother Night by Rachel Pollack (1997)
The Physiognomy by Jeffrey Ford (1998)
The Antelope Wife by Louise Erdrich (1999)
Thraxas by Martin Scott (2000)
Declare by Tim Powers / Galveston by Sean Stewart (2001)
The Other Wind by Ursula K. Le Guin (2002)
The Facts of Life by Graham Joyce / Ombria in Shadow by Patricia A. McKillip (2003)
Tooth and Claw by Jo Walton (2004)
Jonathan Strange & Mr Norrell by Susanna Clarke (2005)
Kafka on the Shore by Haruki Murakami (2006)
Soldier of Sidon by Gene Wolfe (2007)
Ysabel by Guy Gavriel Kay (2008)
The Shadow Year by Jeffrey Ford / Tender Morsels by Margo Lanagan (2009)
The City & the City by China Miéville (2010)
Who Fears Death by Nnedi Okorafor (2011)
Osama by Lavie Tidhar (2012)
Alif the Unseen by G. Willow Wilson (2013)
A Stranger in Olondria by Sofia Samatar (2014)
The Bone Clocks by David Mitchell (2015)
The Chimes by Anna Smaill (2016)
The Sudden Appearance of Hope by Claire North (2017)
Jade City by Fonda Lee / The Changeling by Victor LaValle (2018)
Witchmark by C. L. Polk (2019)
Queen of the Conquered by Kacen Callender (2020)
Trouble the Saints by Alaya Dawn Johnson (2021)
The Jasmine Throne by Tasha Suri (2022)
Saint Death's Daughter by C. S. E. Cooney (2023)
The Reformatory by Tananarive Due (2024)
v
t
e
Stand on Zanzibar by John Brunner (1969)
The Jagged Orbit by John Brunner (1970)
Rendezvous with Rama by Arthur C. Clarke (1973)
Inverted World by Christopher Priest (1974)
Orbitsville by Bob Shaw (1975)
Brontomek! by Michael G. Coney (1976)
The Jonah Kit by Ian Watson (1977)
A Scanner Darkly by Philip K. Dick (1978)
The Unlimited Dream Company by J. G. Ballard (1979)
Timescape by Gregory Benford (1980)
The Shadow of the Torturer by Gene Wolfe (1981)
Helliconia Spring by Brian W. Aldiss (1982)
Tik-Tok by John Sladek (1983)
Mythago Wood by Robert Holdstock (1984)
Helliconia Winter by Brian W. Aldiss (1985)
The Ragged Astronauts by Bob Shaw (1986)
Gráinne by Keith Roberts (1987)
Lavondyss by Robert Holdstock (1988)
Pyramids by Terry Pratchett (1989)
Take Back Plenty by Colin Greenland (1990)
The Fall of Hyperion by Dan Simmons (1991)
Red Mars by Kim Stanley Robinson (1992)
Aztec Century by Christopher Evans (1993)
Feersum Endjinn by Iain M. Banks (1994)
The Time Ships by Stephen Baxter (1995)
Excession by Iain M. Banks (1996)
The Sparrow by Mary Doria Russell (1997)
The Extremes by Christopher Priest (1998)
The Sky Road by Ken MacLeod (1999)
Ash: A Secret History by Mary Gentle (2000)
Chasm City by Alastair Reynolds (2001)
The Separation by Christopher Priest (2002)
Felaheen by Jon Courtenay Grimwood (2003)
River of Gods by Ian McDonald (2004)
Air by Geoff Ryman (2005)
End of the World Blues by Jon Courtenay Grimwood (2006)
Brasyl by Ian McDonald (2007)
The Night Sessions by Ken MacLeod (2008)
The City & the City by China Miéville (2009)
The Dervish House by Ian McDonald (2010)
The Islanders by Christopher Priest (2011)
Jack Glass by Adam Roberts (2012)
Ancillary Justice by Ann Leckie and Ack-Ack Macaque by Gareth L. Powell (tie) (2013)
Ancillary Sword by Ann Leckie (2014)
The House of Shattered Wings by Aliette de Bodard (2015)
Europe in Winter by Dave Hutchinson (2016)
The Rift by Nina Allan (2017)
Embers of War by Gareth L. Powell (2018)
Children of Ruin by Adrian Tchaikovsky (2019)
The City We Became by N. K. Jemisin (2020)
Shards of Earth by Adrian Tchaikovsky (2021)
City of Last Chances by Adrian Tchaikovsky (2022)
The Green Man’s Quarry by Juliet E. McKenna (2023)
Three Eight One by Aliya Whiteley (2024)


URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Oath_of_Fealty_(novel)
Content:

Oath of Fealty is a 1981 novel by American writers Larry Niven and Jerry Pournelle, published originally by Phantasia Press, then by Timescape Books,[1] with numerous reprints. Set in the near future, it involves an arcology, a large inhabited structure, called Todos Santos, which rises above a crime-ridden Los Angeles, California, but has little beyond casual contact with the city. The novel popularized the phrase "think of it as evolution in action", which occurs elsewhere in Niven's books. The novel anticipated the building of the Los Angeles subway. It was included in David Pringle's book Science Fiction: The 100 Best Novels.


## Plot summary
In the near future, a race riot results in the destruction of an area just outside Los Angeles. The city sells the construction rights to a private company, who then construct an arcology, named Todos Santos, to which control of the area and legal jurisdiction was ceded. The higher standard of living enjoyed by Todos Santos residents causes resentment among Angelenos. The arcology dwellers have evolved a different culture, sacrificing privacy – there are cameras (not routinely monitored) even in the private apartments – in exchange for security. The residents are fiercely loyal to the arcology and its management, and the loyalty runs both ways. During the course of the novel, Todos Santos is compared to a feudal society, with loyalty and obligations running both ways, hence the title of the novel. The systems at the arcology are run by MILLIE, an advanced computer system, and some high-level executives have direct links to MILLIE via bio-electronic implants in their brains.[2] Other workers in the arcology work by telepresence, including one woman who remotely operates construction equipment on a lunar base.
Todos Santos causes resentment among Angelenos, but has improved their lives as well. The company that owns the arcology tows icebergs in, solving the water shortage for all Southern Californians. Todos Santos has dug a Los Angeles subway using a digging machine, which uses an oxyhydrogen torch. Todos Santos is at the hub of the subway system, and contains a huge mall, which Angelenos may visit. This easy access causes Los Angeles' city officials to complain about the shopping dollars and tax revenues going outside the city limits.
As the story opens, three young Angelenos sneak into the maintenance areas of Todos Santos. When they are detected by Todos Santos' security systems and personnel, they give every appearance of being terrorists, including spoofing the correct electronic access codes. When non-lethal means of stopping the three fail, Deputy Manager Preston Sanders orders lethal gas released rather than risk the disastrous consequences of a bomb going off. Two of the intruders are killed. They turn out to be youths, with high tech equipment and boxes with such labels as "bomb", but without the actual means of harming the arcology. It soon turns out that they were duped by the "Friends of Man and the Earth Society" (FROMATES), anti-technology zealots who want to see Todos Santos destroyed or abandoned, as a means of forcing the arcology to turn off its lethal defenses for a later real attack.
The deaths of the two youths cause political problems. Sanders is charged with murder. While arcology manager Art Bonner is quite prepared to defy the city authorities, Sanders turns himself in. The arcology is forced to turn off its lethal defenses as the FROMATES planned. When that happens, they soon face a full-fledged attack by the FROMATES, which they deter by non-lethal means, until the intruders prove they have deadly weapons, at which point Todos Santos security responds in kind, shooting and killing most of the intruders. While city authorities are still reacting to this, the arcology launches a jailbreak, the idea of chief engineer (and resident genius) Tony Rand. They tunnel under the jail using the tunneling machine that the "Saints" used to build the L.A. subway, release sleep gas into the jail, and free Sanders.
Los Angeles soon retaliates with arrest and search warrants, but they are soon defeated by the sheer size of the arcology and the ability of the Todos Santos executives, aided in part by their direct links to MILLIE, to hide Rand and Sanders. After Todos Santos shows that it can cause Los Angeles trouble, such as by contaminating the Los Angeles water supply with salt water, and by work stoppages among the telepresence operators, a truce is arrived at: Rand and Sanders will leave the country permanently, and relations between Los Angeles and Todos Santos will be restored. In effect, Todos Santos has won, if only by restoring the status quo ante.


## Reception
It was chosen as one of the 100 best science fiction novels from 1949–1984, by critic David Pringle. It has been nominated numerous times for a Prometheus Award for best classic libertarian science fiction novel.


## References
^ "Oath of Fealty". Kirkus Reviews. October 1, 1981. Retrieved October 6, 2024.
^ Pringle, David (June 30, 2014). Science Fiction: The 100 Best Novels. Orion. ISBN 978-0-947761-11-0. Retrieved February 16, 2016.


## Further reading
Larry Niven, Jerry Pournelle: Oath of Fealty. Baen Books, 2007. ISBN 1-4165-5516-1


## External links
Oath of Fealty title listing at the Internet Speculative Fiction Database
Review, from Science Fiction: A Very Short Introduction, by David Seed, at Google Books
v
t
e
World of Ptavvs (1966)
A Gift from Earth (1968)
Neutron Star (1968)
Protector (1973)
Tales of Known Space (1975)
Flatlander (1976)
The Patchwork Girl (1986)
Crashlander (1994)
Ringworld (1970)
The Ringworld Engineers (1979)
The Ringworld Throne (1996)
Ringworld's Children (2004)
Fleet of Worlds (2007)
Juggler of Worlds (2008)
Destroyer of Worlds (2009)
Betrayer of Worlds (2010)
Fate of Worlds (2012)
The Magic Goes Away (1976)
The Magic May Return (1981)
More Magic (1984)
The Burning City (2000)
Burning Tower (2005)
The Seascape Tattoo (2016)
Inferno (1976)
Lucifer's Hammer (1977)
Oath of Fealty (1981)
Footfall (1985)
Escape from Hell (2009)
The Mote in God's Eye (1974)
The Gripping Hand (1993)
The Legacy of Heorot (1987)
Beowulf's Children (1995)
Destiny's Road (1997)
Starborn & Godsons (2020)
Dream Park (1981)
The Barsoom Project (1989)
The California Voodoo Game (1992)
The Moon Maze Game (2011)
A World Out of Time (1976)
The Integral Trees (1984)
The Smoke Ring (1987)
The Flying Sorcerers (1971)
The Descent of Anansi (1982)
Fallen Angels (1991)
Building Harlequin's Moon (2005)
Bowl of Heaven (2012)
All the Myriad Ways (1971)
The Flight of the Horse (1973)
Inconstant Moon (1973)
A Hole in Space (1974)
Convergent Series (1979)
Limits (1985)
N-Space (1990)
Playgrounds of the Mind (1991)
Bridging the Galaxies (1993)
Rainbow Mars (1999)
Scatterbrain (2003)
The Draco Tavern (2006)
Stars and Gods (2010)
The Best of Larry Niven (2010)
"At the Core"
"The Borderland of Sol"
"Death by Ecstasy"
"The Defenseless Dead"
"Flash Crowd"
"Flatlander"
"Grendel"
"The Handicapped"
"The Hole Man"
"The Jigsaw Man"
"The Magic Goes Away"
"Neutron Star"
"Procrustes"
"The Return of William Proxmire"
"The Soft Weapon"
"What Good Is A Glass Dagger?"
Niven's laws
"Man of Steel, Woman of Kleenex"
"The Slaver Weapon" (Star Trek: The Animated Series)
"Downstream" (Land of the Lost)
"Hurricane" (Land of the Lost) with David Gerrold
"Circle" (Land of the Lost) with David Gerrold
Collections by Niven or others
With Edward M. Lerner
Set in the CoDominium series
With Steven Barnes


URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/No_Enemy_But_Time
Content:

No Enemy But Time is a 1982 science fiction novel by Michael Bishop. It won the 1982 Nebula Award for Best Novel, and was also nominated for the 1983 John W. Campbell Memorial Award. It was included in David Pringle's book Science Fiction: The 100 Best Novels.


## Plot synopsis
The novel follows the story of a modern black American man who is able to mentally project himself back to pre-human Africa, where he meets (and eventually mates) with humanity's prehistoric ancestors.[1]
At less than one year old, John Monegal is abandoned by his mother and adopted by USAF officer Hugo Monegal and his wife Jeanette. Since the very beginning of his life, John dreams of an ancient world and becomes an expert of the Pleistocene epoch, the era of the Homo habilis in Africa. When he is 18, John gets in touch with a paleonthologist, Alistair Patrick Blair, who serves as prime minister in the fictional country of Zarakal (approximately representing Kenya according to the author's preface) and works closely with a US physical scientist, Woodrow Kaprow, who has developed a time machine which brings John back to the era he dreams of. Just before leaving to the past, John discovers his mother wants to publish a book based on voice records of his dreams, and angry and deluded, he leaves her house and changes his name into Joshua Kampa.[1]
Almost lost in the remote past of a world which is the frontier between non-human and human life, John/Joshua feels he has reached the reality he always belonged to, and is accepted by a group of individuals who live in the African savanna. He gives a name to all his new friends, and learns to eat and live like them. Joshua starts thinking he will never get back to the 20th century. After a while he falls in love with a pre-historic woman, Helen, who gets pregnant and dies at the daughter's birth. To save his child and let her survive in a better world, Joshua goes back to the area of the time machine, where he is mysteriously saved by two African astronauts apparently coming from the future. Back to his actual life, Joshua finds he lost his dreaming power and learns that only a month in modern world's time has passed since he left; this is why he struggles in being believed about his daughter. As years pass, Joshua learns his daughter has the same dreaming power he used to have, but she is projected towards the future.[1]
After several years Joshua becomes a minister of the Zarakali government, and his 15-year-old daughter escapes with an agent from Uganda, Dick Aruj, who has convinced her to join a program of time travel to the future.[1]


## References
^ a b c d "Review: No Enemy But Time by Michael Bishop".
v
t
e
Dune by Frank Herbert (1966)
Babel-17 by Samuel R. Delany / Flowers for Algernon by Daniel Keyes (1967)
The Einstein Intersection by Samuel R. Delany (1968)
Rite of Passage by Alexei Panshin (1969)
The Left Hand of Darkness by Ursula K. Le Guin (1970)
Ringworld by Larry Niven (1971)
A Time of Changes by Robert Silverberg (1972)
The Gods Themselves by Isaac Asimov (1973)
Rendezvous with Rama by Arthur C. Clarke (1974)
The Dispossessed by Ursula K. Le Guin (1975)
The Forever War by Joe Haldeman (1976)
Man Plus by Frederik Pohl (1977)
Gateway by Frederik Pohl (1978)
Dreamsnake by Vonda N. McIntyre (1979)
The Fountains of Paradise by Arthur C. Clarke (1980)
Timescape by Gregory Benford (1981)
The Claw of the Conciliator by Gene Wolfe (1982)
No Enemy But Time by Michael Bishop (1983)
Startide Rising by David Brin (1984)
Neuromancer by William Gibson (1985)
Ender's Game by Orson Scott Card (1986)
Speaker for the Dead by Orson Scott Card (1987)
The Falling Woman by Pat Murphy (1988)
Falling Free by Lois McMaster Bujold (1989)
The Healer's War by Elizabeth Ann Scarborough (1990)
Tehanu: The Last Book of Earthsea by Ursula K. Le Guin (1991)
Stations of the Tide by Michael Swanwick (1992)
Doomsday Book by Connie Willis (1993)
Red Mars by Kim Stanley Robinson (1994)
Moving Mars by Greg Bear (1995)
The Terminal Experiment by Robert J. Sawyer (1996)
Slow River by Nicola Griffith (1997)
The Moon and the Sun by Vonda N. McIntyre (1998)
Forever Peace by Joe Haldeman (1999)
Parable of the Talents by Octavia E. Butler (2000)
Darwin's Radio by Greg Bear (2001)
The Quantum Rose by Catherine Asaro (2002)
American Gods by Neil Gaiman (2003)
Speed of Dark by Elizabeth Moon (2004)
Paladin of Souls by Lois McMaster Bujold (2005)
Camouflage by Joe Haldeman (2006)
Seeker by Jack McDevitt (2007)
The Yiddish Policemen's Union by Michael Chabon (2008)
Powers by Ursula K. Le Guin (2009)
The Windup Girl by Paolo Bacigalupi (2010)
Blackout/All Clear by Connie Willis (2011)
Among Others by Jo Walton (2012)
2312 by Kim Stanley Robinson (2013)
Ancillary Justice by Ann Leckie (2014)
Annihilation by Jeff VanderMeer (2015)
Uprooted by Naomi Novik (2016)
All the Birds in the Sky by Charlie Jane Anders (2017)
The Stone Sky by N. K. Jemisin (2018)
The Calculating Stars by Mary Robinette Kowal (2019)
A Song for a New Day by Sarah Pinsker (2020)
Network Effect by Martha Wells (2021)
A Master of Djinn by P. Djèlí Clark (2022)
Babel, or the Necessity of Violence by R. F. Kuang (2023)
The Saint of Bright Doors by Vajra Chandrasekera (2024)
Someone You Can Build a Nest In by John Wiswell (2025)


URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Neuromancer
Content:


Neuromancer is a 1984 science fiction novel by American-Canadian author William Gibson. Set in a near-future dystopia, the narrative follows Case, a computer hacker enlisted into a crew by a powerful artificial intelligence and a traumatised former soldier to complete a high-stakes heist. It was Gibson's debut novel and, after its success, served as the first entry in the Sprawl trilogy, followed by Count Zero (1986) and Mona Lisa Overdrive (1988).
Gibson had primarily written countercultural short stories for science-fiction periodicals before Neuromancer. Influences on the novel include the detective stories of Raymond Chandler, the comic art of Jean Giraud, and William S. Burroughs's Naked Lunch (1959). Neuromancer expanded and popularised the setting and concepts of an earlier Gibson story, "Burning Chrome" (1981), which introduced cyberspace—a digital space traversable by humans—and "jacking in", a bio-mechanical method of interfacing with computers.
Neuromancer is a foundational work of early cyberpunk, although critics differ on whether the novel ignited the genre or if it was lifted by its inevitable rise. They agree it highlighted the genre's key features, like the placement of technological advancement against societal decay and criminality. Gibson's novel also defined the major conventions and terminology of the genre—cyberspace, jacking in, and Intrusion Countermeasure Electronics (ICE). Critics discuss the novel in the historical context of the 1970s and 1980s, a period marked by conservatism, deregulation, and free-market economics.
Neuromancer was released without significant hype but became an underground hit through word of mouth. Following release, it received critical acclaim and transformed the science-fiction genre. Mainstream recognition raised Gibson from relative obscurity. It remains the first and only novel to win all three of the Hugo Award, the Nebula Award for Best Novel, and the Philip K. Dick Award. It has been regarded as a classic work of the cyberpunk genre and, in 2005, was named one of Time's All-Time 100 Novels.


## Background


### Author and composition
In 1981, William Gibson worked as a teaching assistant at his alma mater, the University of British Columbia. In the same year, his Nebula Award-nominated short story "Johnny Mnemonic" introduced one of Neuromancer's main characters, Molly.[1] "Johnny Mnemonic" infused elements of crime fiction, like marginalised communities and criminal society, with technology, blurring the boundary of human and machine.[2] The setting of the Sprawl and the concept of cyberspace first appeared in Omni the following year in his short story "Burning Chrome",[3] and were popularised by Neuromancer.[4] Later in 1981, Gibson was commissioned to write a novel by science-fiction editor Terry Carr for his second series of Ace Science Fiction Specials; he submitted an outline later that year with the working title Jacked In, eventually renaming it Neuromancer.[5][a] Gibson did not understand computing or networking in much detail, primarily wanting the shared vocabulary surrounding the topics.[6]
The novel underwent considerable revision, with Gibson saying he rewrote the first two-thirds twelve times to ensure there was both stylistic consistency and a "vaguely plausible" plot.[7] Gibson's sought to eliminate "clunk", contracting his prose to ensure "individual parts carry more weight". He did not write the novel with a concrete outline, or initially know how it would end,[8] writing the novel in "blind animal panic" because he thought it would fail if he did not hold the reader's attention.[9] Gibson added the novel's final sentence ("He never saw Molly again.") to prevent himself from writing a sequel.[10][b]


### Inspiration
Neuromancer has many literary progenitors. Detective fiction, like the work of Raymond Chandler, is frequently cited as an influence on Neuromancer. For example, critics note similarities between Gibson's Case and Chandler's Philip Marlowe: Case is described as a "cowboy" and a "detective" and is involved in a heist;[12] Molly, the novel's primary female character, has connections to the "molls" of 1940s film noir.[13] Case's illegal practices, like theft and murder, situate him within a wider tradition of transgressive detectives, like the opiate addiction of Arthur Conan Doyle's Sherlock Holmes.[14] Gibson stated that the pulp noir core of the novel was key to engaging his readers, and cited the works of Dashiell Hammett and Robert Stone as major influences on its style.[15][c] For dialogue, the author incorporated late 1960s Toronto drug dealer and biker slang into the novel.[17] Gibson imagined the novel's time frame as the 2030s but purposefully omitted explicit dates; he said the novel, and its sequels, were written to reflect the 1980s.[18]
Gibson's prose style—fast-paced, fragmented imagery—resembles the styles of William S. Burroughs and J. G. Ballard.[5] Burroughs's Naked Lunch (1959) is frequently cited by critics as an influence on Neuromancer,[19] including by one as its "principal source", as a literary predecessor of Gibson's "cyberspace".[19] Gibson's conception of cyberspace was compared by Samuel R. Delany to Roger Zelazny's early short stories; Delany and other critics have explored the character of Molly as a development on the cyborg assassin of Joanna Russ's The Female Man (1975).[20][21][d]
Visual media likewise impacted the style of Neuromancer. Gibson has repeatedly mentioned the artwork of the 1970s French magazine Métal Hurlant,[22] with critics noting the proto-cyberpunk aesthetic of Jean "Moebius" Giraud's "The Long Tomorrow" (1976), republished in the American Heavy Metal magazine in 1977.[23] John Carpenter's Escape from New York (1981) influenced Gibson's approach to world-building, pointing to throwaway lines that suggested much about the film's world and its history beyond the narrative itself.[24] Upon seeing Ridley Scott's Blade Runner (1982), Gibson worried readers would think he had copied the film's "fine visual texture".[24] Gibson wrote in his introduction to the graphic novel of Neuromancer that Blade Runner was not a conscious influence;[22] in a later interview, he recounted a lunch with Scott where they both acknowledged a shared debt to Moebius's work in Métal Hurlant.[25]


## Plot
Case is a low-level hustler in the dystopian underworld of Chiba City, Japan. Once a talented computer hacker and "console cowboy", Case was caught stealing from his employer, who retaliated by damaging Case's central nervous system, leaving him unable to access the virtual reality dataspace called the "matrix". Case is approached by Molly, an augmented "razorgirl" and mercenary on behalf of a shadowy US ex-military officer named Armitage, who offers to cure Case in exchange for his services as a hacker. Case undergoes the cure, but discovers that Armitage has sabotaged him with a time-delayed poison. If Case completes the job, Armitage will disarm the poison; if not, he will find himself crippled again.
Armitage has Case and Molly steal a ROM module that contains the saved consciousness of one of Case's mentors, legendary hacker McCoy Pauley. Suspicious of his motives and the unusual nature of the job, Molly and Case begin to investigate Armitage on the side. They discover that Armitage is actually Colonel Willis Corto, the only survivor of the failed anti-Soviet mission "Screaming Fist". He was returned to the United States for extensive psychotherapy and reconstructive surgery, but snapped after learning that the government had been aware the mission would likely fail and went ahead with it regardless. He killed his handler and disappeared into the criminal underworld, eventually resurfacing under the name Armitage.
In Istanbul, the team recruits Peter Riviera, a sociopathic thief and drug addict. The trail leads Case to Wintermute, an artificial intelligence created by the eccentric Tessier-Ashpool family. The Tessier-Ashpools spend their time in rotating cryonic preservation in their home, the Villa Straylight. The Villa is located on Freeside, a cylindrical space habitat which functions as a Las Vegas-style space resort for the wealthy.
Wintermute reveals itself to Case and explains that it is one half of a super-AI entity planned by the family. It is programmed with a need to merge with its other half, Neuromancer, but because of the severe restrictions placed on AI programs by the Turing Registry, it cannot achieve this on its own. It has manipulated and recruited Armitage and his team to bring it into contact with Neuromancer, access to which is physically secured within the Villa Straylight. Case is tasked with entering cyberspace to pierce the software barriers around Neuromancer with an icebreaker program. Riviera is to obtain the password to the physical terminal from Lady 3Jane Marie-France Tessier-Ashpool, the only member of the family awake and at the Villa. The group solicits help from a rastafarian cluster on board Freeside, living in a separate area they call Zion.
Armitage's personality starts to disintegrate and he begins to believe he is back in Screaming Fist. It is revealed that Wintermute had originally contacted Corto through a computer during his psychotherapy, during which time he manipulated Corto to create the Armitage persona. As Corto breaks through, he becomes violently unstable and Wintermute ejects him into space.
Riviera meets Lady 3Jane and betrays the team, helping Lady 3Jane and Hideo, her ninja bodyguard, capture Molly. Under orders from Wintermute, Case tracks Molly down. Neuromancer traps Case within a simulated reality after he enters cyberspace. He finds the consciousness of Linda Lee, his girlfriend from Chiba City, who was murdered by one of his underworld contacts. He also meets Neuromancer, who takes the form of a young boy. Neuromancer tries to convince Case to remain in the virtual world with Linda, but Case refuses.
With Wintermute guiding them, Case goes to confront Lady 3Jane, Riviera, and Hideo. Riviera tries to kill Case, but Lady 3Jane is sympathetic towards Case and Molly, and Hideo protects him. Riviera flees, and Molly explains that he is doomed anyway, as she had spiked his drugs with a lethal toxin. The team makes it to the computer terminal. Case enters cyberspace to guide the icebreaker; Lady 3Jane gives her password, and the lock opens. Wintermute unites with Neuromancer, becoming a superconsciousness. The poison in Case's bloodstream is washed out and he and Molly are profusely paid, while Pauley's ROM construct is apparently erased at his own request.
Molly leaves Case, who finds a new girlfriend and resumes his hacking work. Wintermute/Neuromancer contacts him, claiming it has become "the sum total of the works, the whole show" and is looking for others like itself. Scanning recorded transmissions, the super-AI finds a transmission from the Alpha Centauri star system, not being decoded or interpreted before. This implies that the counterpart in the Centauri system is another, alien super-AI, so first contact is being made between AI-s, instead of humankind and alien lifeforms.
While logged into cyberspace, Case glimpses Neuromancer standing in the distance with Linda Lee, and himself. He also hears inhuman laughter, which suggests that Pauley still lives. The sighting implies that Neuromancer created a copy of Case's consciousness, which now exists in cyberspace with those of Linda and Pauley.


## Context and interpretation


### Political and economic
Neuromancer, its sequels and other cyberpunk stories are often discussed within the socio-economic context of the 1980s, a period of economic restructuring,[26][27] corporate globalization,[28] and government deregulation.[29][30] In the 1990s, a particularly influential view was that the novel reflected the "dilemmas of post-Fordist work and life",[31][32] with Gibson reflecting or recreating the societal change brought on by the economic and industrial changes of the 1970s and 1980s.[31][33] Cyberspace's reliance on the circulation of data can be understood as a metaphor for the global circulation of financial capital,[28][34] and its addictiveness parodies the culture of workaholism among Silicon Valley developers.[31] His protagonists have been identified as resembling contract workers,[27] with Case dependent on diazepam to cope with the barrage of "relentless and fragmented data [and] get through the workday".[35] The novel's characters represent the professional–managerial class and the novel was popular with the demographic.[36][37]
While the novel represents anxiety about societal change, it is not generally viewed as being about resisting it. Gibson's protagonists do not threaten the social order of his worlds.[38] Corporations view the novel's freelance criminal protagonists as another tool at their disposal.[31] Gibson's inexperience as an author led to the novel capturing the essence of 1980s inequality but reinforcing and appealing to the dominant power structure, leaving his "dead-cynicism [and] fashionable survival".[32] Caroline Alphin writes that human life is worth whatever it is worth to an employer.[39] After his nervous system is damaged and he loses his ability to work as a hacker, Case must murder people for money to replenish his human capital because of Chiba City's neoliberalist order; Caroline Alpin describes this death in the novel as "failure to maximise one's human capital".[40] The novel shows that human minds can be saved to read-only memory, preserving deceased or unwilling people's technical skills for at-will use by corporations.[39]


### Technological
Gibson's generation was the first to write science fiction at a time when the genre's concepts were becoming part of daily life.[41] Gibson recognised, and benefitted from, the growing public fascination with the evolving technology landscape,[42] and used these concerns to "create an entire cultural vocabulary",[42] merging the language of human experience with the electronic.[43][e] Bruce Sterling relates the cyborg to the increasing use of technology that directly interfaces with the human body, citing contact lenses and the Sony Walkman.[44]


### Racial
Several critics have explored the in-orbit Rastafarian cluster called Zion. Scholar Andrew Strombeck writes that their vocabulary is distinct from the jargon used elsewhere, but notes that the portrayal embodies stereotypes about Rastafarians. He highlights both the group's origin as a labor protest movement and that they are the only group to perform manual labor in the novel.[45] Their society could provide an alternative to corporate hegemony but ultimately form "another node in the capitalist network".[46][30] Samuel R. Delany, an African-American writer, criticized the portrayal,[47] but described Neuromancer as "an extraordinary book".[48] He regarded Zion as a stereotyped and marginalized group with "shrunken hearts", easily manipulated by the AI Wintermute. He describes Gibson's portrayal of their spirituality as reductive and superficial.[47] Tom Moylan notes that Neuromancer loses its "critical edge" in exploring Zion's within the primary narrative,[49] and describes a pattern in Gibson's Sprawl trilogy of including the racial Other but limiting their role to "happy helper".[50]


### Genre
When Gibson was writing Neuromancer, the term "cyberpunk" did not exist. Coined by Bruce Bethke for a short-story title,[51] the term "cyberpunk" was popularised by Gardner Dozois in a 1984 The Washington Post article, using the term to describe Gibson, Bruce Sterling, Lewis Shiner, and Greg Bear.[52] Gibson exchanged letters with Sterling, Shiner, and Rudy Rucker, sharing ideas, criticism and praise of each other's work.[53] This created a kind of shared outlook through recurring themes and motifs.[54] As with the New Wave, the term could reflect a desire for the writers to be distinguished from the "old farts" previously eminent in science fiction.[55] The cyberpunk style contrasted control and communications technologies with the rebellious, countercultural punk aesthetic.[56] Istvan Csicsery-Ronay, Jr. writes that Gibson's subtle use of metaphor, in line with the wider cyberpunk style, blurs the boundaries of human and machine intelligence.[43]
Although frequently cited as the quintessential cyberpunk novel, Neuromancer's prototype status has provided wider analytical significance, extending beyond the cyberpunk movement.[57] Owing to its clear influences, critics have discussed the novel and its structure in relation to pulp literature.[58]


## Reception
Released without any special attention as a mass-market paperback, Neuromancer's release coincided with the boom in personal computing,[59] and gained an audience primarily through word of mouth.[60] The Observer noted that The New York Times did not mention the novel until 10 years after release,[61] but contemporary reviews were largely positive. The Observer and The Evening Sun agreed that the novel presented a compelling image of a near-future.[62][63] One critic compared Gibson's cyberspace to Disney's Tron (1982).[62] It appealed to people who were fans of Gibson's short stories,[64] and found success with readers who were not previously interested in computer fiction.[65] Gibson recorded an abridged version of the novel as cassette-based audiobook in 1995, which a reviewer for Wired found somewhat disappointing but repeated praise for the novel itself.[66]
Neuromancer became the only novel ever to win the "triple crown"—Hugo Award for Best Novel, the Nebula Award for Best Novel and the Philip K. Dick Award for original paperback fiction.[67][68][f] It was nominated or shortlisted for virtually every other science-fiction prize,[9] including the 1984 BSFA Award for Best Novel.[71][60]


## Impact
The novel catalysed the cyberpunk movement, influencing artists across virtually all forms of media, including film, literature, visual art, fashion and video gaming.[42] It has been described as "the quintessential cyberpunk novel",[72] and the "archetypal cyberpunk work",[73] and the most notable 1980s science-fiction novel.[74] Edward Bryant sarcastically referred to subsequent cyberpunk works as NOGS—novels of Gibsonian sensibility.[75] In 2005, Time named Neuromancer one of its All-Time 100 Novels.[76]
The novel's immense success, alongside the continuous output work of other early cyberpunk writers—most commonly listed as Bruce Sterling, Lewis Shiner, John Shirley and Rudy Rucker—virtually guaranteed the genre's immediate survival.[53] In particular, Neuromancer provided future cyberpunk stories with a basic structure and vocabulary: protagonists who interface with computer hardware using a biological port, circumvent anti-hacking protocols (Intrusion Countermeasures Electronics, or ICE) and navigate a three-dimensional virtual world (cyberspace).[42]
Motifs and terminology popularised by the novel—the matrix, flatlining, cranial jack, biological microchips and traversal in cyberspace—were replicated or parodied by other authors.[77][78] Developments anticipated by the novel include reality TV, nanomachines and virtual communities. It inspired early computer programmers in the creation of the Internet and impacted early computer culture.[79][80][81] Gibson has rejected the novel's characterisation as impactful on real-life technologists, reasoning that the ideas came "from the same place [he] got them".[82] In 1992, John Perry Barlow, co-founder of the Electronic Frontier Foundation, introduced the term "cyberspace" to the US Intelligence Community during a speech in 1992, mentioning Neuromancer directly.[83] To Gibson's dismay,[g] the term provided a name for a product by Autodesk.[85]


## Adaptations
In 1989, Marvel's Epic Comics imprint published a 48-page graphic novel version by Tom de Haven and Bruce Jensen. It only covers the first two chapters, "Chiba City Blues" and "The Shopping Expedition", and was never continued.[25] A loosely based video game adaptation of the same name was published in 1988 by Interplay Entertainment for the Apple II and Commodore 64.[86]
Timothy Leary, who worked on the Interplay video game, had previously worked on a previous video game adaptation. Leary's plans included writing by William S. Burroughs, photography by Helmut Newton, and a score provided by the rock band Devo. Artist Keith Haring was intended to provide the physical likeness of Case. The game was planned as a tie-in to an unproduced film adaptation.[87]
While Neuromancer has never been adapted into a film, there have been several attempts; several journalists have described the novel as "unfilmable".[88][89] British director Chris Cunningham and musician Aphex Twin were attached to the project, providing the script and soundtrack, respectively.[90] While Cunningham's script gained Gibson's blessing, Cunningham ultimately withdrew over not being given final cut privilege.[89] Actor Hayden Christensen was rumoured to be attached.[88] Other directors with previous connections to aborted film projects include Chuck Russell, Vincenzo Natali and Tim Miller.[90][91][92] Natali, who also had Gibson's blessing, worked for several years on the project; offers were extended to actors Liam Neeson and Mark Wahlberg until Natali became unavailable.[93]
In February 2024, Apple announced that it had greenlit a 10-episode series for Apple TV+, co-produced by Skydance Television, Anonymous Content, and DreamCrew Entertainment, with J. D. Dillard joining Graham Roland as co-showrunners.[94] The announced cast includes Callum Turner as Case,[95] Briana Middleton as Molly,[96] Joseph Lee as Hideo,[97] Mark Strong as Armitage,[96] and Clémence Poésy as Marie-France Tessier.[98]


## Notes and references


### Notes
^ This change was at his publisher's suggestion, hoping to avoid the sexual connotation of the phrase "jacking off".[5]
^ Molly appears in the Sprawl trilogy's third entry, Mona Lisa Overdrive, reporting that Case retired and married.[11]
^ Robert Stone's work is associated with settings that included great social turbulence, most famously the Vietnam War.[16]
^ According to Latham, Delany comments that Gibson appeared "blind to any mention" of discussions on the matter.[20]
^ Csiscery-Ronay, Jr. writes that "drugs and sex [...] turn you on, you get a buzz, you get wired, you space out, you go on automatic."[43]
^ This achievement was described by the Mail & Guardian as "the sci-fi writer's version of winning the Goncourt, Booker and Pulitzer prizes in the same year".[69] According to Philip K. Dick Award judge Robert J. Sawyer on his blog, this award is unfeasible as an achievement due to differences in eligibility criteria.[70]
^ Of the Autodesk product, Gibson said "technical people" had missed "several layers of irony".[84]


### References
^ Smith 2014, p. 11.
^ Miller 2016, p. 41.
^ Miller 2016, p. 4.
^ McFarlane, Murphy & Schmeink 2020, p. 1.
^ a b c Smith 2014, p. 12.
^ Cavallaro 2000, p. 70.
^ McCaffery 1991, p. 271.
^ McCaffery 1991, p. 272.
^ a b Murphy 2024, p. 2.
^ Gibson 2003.
^ Murphy 2024, p. 9.
^ Nazare 2003, p. 386.
^ McCaffery 1991, pp. 14–15.
^ Myers 2001, p. 889.
^ Wallace-Wells 2014, p. 215.
^ Weber 2015.
^ Whalen 1992, p. 86.
^ Gibson 2012, p. 45.
^ a b Wood 1996, p. 11.
^ a b Latham 2020, p. 8.
^ Murphy 2024, pp. 10–11.
^ a b Gibson, De Haven & Jensen 1989.
^ Higgins & Iung 2020, p. 91.
^ a b Smith 2014, p. 42.
^ a b Murphy 2024, p. 16.
^ Rosenthal 1991, pp. 90–91.
^ a b Rieder 2020, p. 338.
^ a b O'Connell 2020, p. 287-286.
^ Moylan 2010, p. 82-83.
^ a b Moylan 2010, p. 89.
^ a b c d Rosenthal 1991, p. 99.
^ a b Moylan 2010, p. 94.
^ Moylan 2010, pp. 93–94.
^ Bould 2010, p. 120.
^ Rosenthal 1991, p. 90.
^ Murphy 2024, p. 103.
^ Strombeck 2010, pp. 278–279.
^ Moylan 2010, pp. 92–93.
^ a b Alphin 2021, p. 26.
^ Alphin 2021, p. 27.
^ McCaffery1991, p. 12.
^ a b c d Omry 2022, p. 69.
^ a b c Csiscery-Ronay, Jr. 1991, p. 190.
^ Sterling 1986, p. 8.
^ Strombeck 2010, p. 280.
^ Murphy 2024, p. 73-74.
^ a b Murphy 2024, p. 74-75.
^ Dery 1993, p. 195.
^ Moylan 2010, p. 92-93.
^ Moylan 2010, p. 93-94.
^ Semley 2019, p. 61.
^ Shiner 1992, p. 17.
^ a b Murphy 2020, pp. 15–16.
^ Sterling 1986, p. xi.
^ Csiscery-Ronay, Jr. 1991, p. 184.
^ Murphy 2024, p. 7.
^ Slusser & Shippey 1992, p. 13.
^ Alkon 1992, p. 76.
^ Butler 2004, p. 212.
^ a b Liptak 2014.
^ Adams 2007.
^ a b The Evening Sun 1984, p. 10.
^ Johnston 1984, p. 28.
^ Newsday 1984.
^ The Roanoke Times 1983.
^ Pleshaw 1995.
^ McCaffery 1991, p. 263.
^ Renegar & Dionisopoulos 2011, p. 11.
^ Walker 1996.
^ Sawyer 2016.
^ Omry 2022, p. 68.
^ Melzer 2020, p. 291.
^ Person 1998.
^ Ruddick 1994, p. 84.
^ Shiner 1992, p. 22.
^ Grossman 2005.
^ Murphy 2024, p. 12.
^ Cavallaro 2000, p. 69.
^ Murphy 2024, p. 12-13.
^ Murphy 2024, p. 8.
^ Murphy 2024, p. 41.
^ Perez 2012.
^ Streeter 2005, pp. 757–758.
^ Cavallaro 2000, pp. 66–67.
^ Cavallaro 2000, p. 66-67.
^ Alexander 2014.
^ Robertson 2013.
^ a b Anthony 2008.
^ a b Child 2010.
^ a b Kinnear 2013.
^ Hamman 2025.
^ Couch 2017.
^ Child 2012.
^ Cordero 2024a.
^ Otterman 2024.
^ a b Andreeva 2024.
^ Cordero 2024b.
^ Petski 2025.


## Bibliography


### Books
Alphin, Caroline (2021). Neoliberalism and Cyberpunk Science Fiction: Living on the Edge of Burnout. New York: Routledge. ISBN 978-0-367-49099-7.
Cavallaro, Dani (2000). Cyberpunk and cyberculture: science fiction and the work of William Gibson. London: Athlone Press. ISBN 978-0-485-00412-0.
Gibson, William; De Haven, Tom; Jensen, Bruce (1989). "Introduction". William Gibson's Neuromancer, The Graphic Novel: Volume 1. Epic Comics.
Gibson, William (2012). Distrust That Particular Flavour. Random House. ISBN 9780425252994.
McCaffery, Larry, ed. (1991). Storming the Reality Studio: A Casebook of Cyberpunk and Postmodern Science fiction. Durham: Duke University Press. ISBN 978-0-8223-1158-4. Csiscery-Ronay, Jr., Istvan. "Cyberpunk and Neuromanticism". In McCaffery (1991), pp. 182-193. Veronica, Hollinger. "“Cybernetic Deconstructions: Cyberpunk and Postmodernism". In McCaffery (1991), pp. 203-218.
Csiscery-Ronay, Jr., Istvan. "Cyberpunk and Neuromanticism". In McCaffery (1991), pp. 182-193.
Veronica, Hollinger. "“Cybernetic Deconstructions: Cyberpunk and Postmodernism". In McCaffery (1991), pp. 203-218.
McFarlane, Anna; Murphy, Graham J.; Schmeink, Lars, eds. (2020). The Routledge Companion to Cyberpunk Culture. Routledge companions. New York London: Routledge, Taylor & Francis Group. ISBN 978-0-8153-5193-1. Latham, Rob. "Literary Precursors". In McFarlane, Murphy & Schmeink (2020), pp. 7–14. Murphy, Graham J. "The Mirrorshades Collective". In McFarlane, Murphy & Schmeink (2020), pp. 15-23. Higgins, David M.; Iung, Matthew. "Comic Books". In McFarlane, Murphy & Schmeink (2020), pp. 91–101. Melzer, Patricia. "Cyborg Feminism". In McFarlane, Murphy & Schmeink (2020), pp. 291-299. O'Connell, Hugh Charles. "Cyborg Feminism". In McFarlane, Murphy & Schmeink (2020), pp. 282-290. Rieder, John. "Empire". In McFarlane, Murphy & Schmeink (2020), pp. 335-344.
Latham, Rob. "Literary Precursors". In McFarlane, Murphy & Schmeink (2020), pp. 7–14.
Murphy, Graham J. "The Mirrorshades Collective". In McFarlane, Murphy & Schmeink (2020), pp. 15-23.
Higgins, David M.; Iung, Matthew. "Comic Books". In McFarlane, Murphy & Schmeink (2020), pp. 91–101.
Melzer, Patricia. "Cyborg Feminism". In McFarlane, Murphy & Schmeink (2020), pp. 291-299.
O'Connell, Hugh Charles. "Cyborg Feminism". In McFarlane, Murphy & Schmeink (2020), pp. 282-290.
Rieder, John. "Empire". In McFarlane, Murphy & Schmeink (2020), pp. 335-344.
McFarlane, Anna; Murphy, Graham J.; Schmeink, Lars, eds. (2022). Fifty Key Figures in Cyberpunk Culture. New York, NY: Routledge, Taylor & Francis Group. ISBN 978-1-003-09118-9. Omry, Keren. "William Gibson". In McFarlane, Murphy & Schmeink (2022), pp. 68-73.
Omry, Keren. "William Gibson". In McFarlane, Murphy & Schmeink (2022), pp. 68-73.
Miller, Gerald Alva (2016). Understanding William Gibson. Understanding contemporary American literature. Columbia, South Carolina: The University of South Carolina Press. ISBN 978-1-61117-633-9.
Murphy, Graham J. (2024). William Gibson's "Neuromancer": A Critical Companion. Palgrave Science Fiction and Fantasy: A New Canon (1st ed. 2024 ed.). Cham: Springer Nature Switzerland. ISBN 978-3-031-56626-4.
Slusser, George Edgar; Shippey, Thomas Alan (1992). Fiction 2000: cyberpunk and the future of narrative. Athens, (Ga.): University of Georgia press. ISBN 978-0-8203-1425-9. Shiner, Lewis. "Inside the Movement: Past, Presence and Future". In Slusser & Shippey (1992), pp. 17-25. Csicsery-Ronay, Jr., Istvan. "Futuristic Flu, or, the Revenge of the Future". In Slusser & Shippey (1992), pp. 26-45. Alkon, Paul. "Deus Ex Machina in William Gibson's Neuromancer". In Slusser & Shippey (1992), pp. 75-88.
Shiner, Lewis. "Inside the Movement: Past, Presence and Future". In Slusser & Shippey (1992), pp. 17-25.
Csicsery-Ronay, Jr., Istvan. "Futuristic Flu, or, the Revenge of the Future". In Slusser & Shippey (1992), pp. 26-45.
Alkon, Paul. "Deus Ex Machina in William Gibson's Neuromancer". In Slusser & Shippey (1992), pp. 75-88.
Murphy, Graham J.; Vint, Sherryl, eds. (2010). Beyond Cyberpunk: New Critical Perspectives. Routledge studies in contemporary literature. New York: Routledge. ISBN 978-0-203-85196-8. Moylan, Tom. "Global Economy, Local Texts: Utopian/Dystopian Tension in William Gibson's Cyberpunk Trilogy". In Murphy & Vint (2010), pp. 81-94. Bould, Mark. "Why Neo Flies, and Why He Shouldn't: The Critique of Cyberpun in Gwyneth Jones' Escape Plans and M. John Harrison's Signs of Life". In Murphy & Vint (2010), pp. 116-134.
Moylan, Tom. "Global Economy, Local Texts: Utopian/Dystopian Tension in William Gibson's Cyberpunk Trilogy". In Murphy & Vint (2010), pp. 81-94.
Bould, Mark. "Why Neo Flies, and Why He Shouldn't: The Critique of Cyberpun in Gwyneth Jones' Escape Plans and M. John Harrison's Signs of Life". In Murphy & Vint (2010), pp. 116-134.
Smith, Patrick A., ed. (2014). Conversations with William Gibson. Literary conversations series. Jackson: University press of Mississippi. ISBN 978-1-62846-015-5. Wallace-Wells, David. "Interview with David Wallace-Wells". In Smith (2014), pp. 198-228.
Wallace-Wells, David. "Interview with David Wallace-Wells". In Smith (2014), pp. 198-228.
Sterling, Bruce, ed. (1986). Mirrorshades: The Cyberpunk Anthology (1st ed.). New York: Ace Books. ISBN 0-441-53382-5.


### Articles
Butler, Andrew M. (2004). "Between the "Deaths" of Science Fiction: A Skeptical View of the Possibility for Anti-Genres". Journal of the Fantastic in the Arts. 15 (3 (59)): 208–216. ISSN 0897-0521. JSTOR 43310245.
Dery, Mark (October 1, 1993). "Black to the Future: Interviews with Samuel R. Delany, Greg Tate, and Tricia Rose". South Atlantic Quarterly. 92 (4): 735–778. doi:10.1215/00382876-92-4-735. ISSN 0038-2876.
Myers, Tony (2001). "The Postmodern Imaginary in William Gibson's "Neuromancer"". Modern Fiction Studies. 47 (4): 887–909. ISSN 0026-7724. JSTOR 26286501.
Nazare, Joe (2003). "Marlowe in Mirrorshades: The Cyberpunk (re-) Vision of Chandler". Studies in the Novel. 35 (3): 383–404. ISSN 0039-3827. JSTOR 29533587.
Person, Lawrence (1998). "Notes Toward a Postcyberpunk Manifesto". Nova Express. 4 (4). Retrieved November 6, 2007.
Renegar, Valerie R.; Dionisopoulos, George N. (September 1, 2011). "The Dream of a Cyberpunk Future? Entelechy, Dialectical Tension, and the Comic Corrective in William Gibson's Neuromancer". Southern Communication Journal. 76 (4): 323–341. doi:10.1080/1041794x.2010.500342. ISSN 1041-794X.
Rosenthal, Pam (March 1991). "Jacked In: Fordism, Cyberpunk, Marxism". Socialist Review. 21 (1): 79–103.
Ruddick, Nicholas (1994). "Putting the Bits Together: Information Theory, "Neuromancer", and Science Fiction". Journal of the Fantastic in the Arts. 3 (3/4 (11/12)): 84–92. ISSN 0897-0521. JSTOR 43308200.
Semley, John (2019). "Cyberpunk is Dead: At the inglorious end of a once-promising genre". The Baffler (48): 58–67. ISSN 1059-9789. JSTOR 26842284.
Streeter, Thomas (2005). "The Moment of Wired". Critical Inquiry. 31 (4): 755–779. doi:10.1086/444514. ISSN 0093-1896. JSTOR 10.1086/444514.
Strombeck, Andrew (2010). "The Network and the Archive: The Specter of Imperial Management in William Gibson's "Neuromancer"". Science Fiction Studies. 37 (2): 275–295. doi:10.1525/sfs.37.2.0271. ISSN 0091-7729. JSTOR 25746410.
Wood, Brent (1996). "William S. Burroughs and the Language of Cyberpunk". Science Fiction Studies. 23 (1): 11–26. doi:10.1525/sfs.23.1.0011. ISSN 0091-7729. JSTOR 4240476.
Whalen, Terence (1992). "The Future of a Commodity: Notes toward a Critique of Cyberpunk and the Information Age". Science Fiction Studies. 19 (1): 75–88. doi:10.1525/sfs.19.1.075. ISSN 0091-7729. JSTOR 4240123.


### News
Adams, Tim (August 12, 2007). "Space to think". The Observer. ISSN 0029-7712. Retrieved January 14, 2025.
Andreeva, Nellie (June 28, 2024). "Neuromancer: Briana Middleton Joins Callum Turner In Apple TV+ Series". Deadline Hollywood.
Child, Ben (May 14, 2010). "Is William Gibson's Neuromancer too vast for the big screen?". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Retrieved May 17, 2025.
Child, Ben (August 2, 2012). "Will Liam Neeson and Mark Wahlberg be plugging into Neuromancer?". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Retrieved May 17, 2025.
Cordero, Rosy (2024b). "'Beef's Joseph Lee Joins Leading Cast Of Apple TV+ Drama 'Neuromancer'". Deadline.
Cordero, Rosy (2024a). "Apple Greenlights New Sci-Fi Drama Series 'Neuromancer' Based On William Gibson Novel". Deadline Hollywood. Retrieved February 28, 2024.
Couch, Aaron (2017). "'Deadpool' Director Tim Miller to Adapt 'Neuromancer' for Fox". Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved January 14, 2025.
Liptak, Andrew (2014). "30 Years of William Gibson's Neuromancer". Kirkus Reviews.
Perez, Hugo (January 8, 2012). "Power in This Weird Grey Box: William Gibson's First Technology Memory". VICE.
Petski, Denise (March 6, 2025). "Clémence Poésy Joins 'Neuromancer' Apple TV+ Series". Deadline. Retrieved May 17, 2025.
Robertson, Adi (October 1, 2013). "Timothy Leary's 'Neuromancer' video game could have been incredible". The Verge. Retrieved June 27, 2025.
Walker, Martin (September 3, 1996). "Blade Runner on electro-steroids". The Mail & Guardian. Retrieved January 13, 2025.
Otterman, Joe (April 23, 2024). "Callum Turner to Star in 'Neuromancer' Series at Apple TV+". Variety. Retrieved April 26, 2024.
Weber, Bruce (January 11, 2015). "Robert Stone, Novelist of the Vietnam Era and Beyond, Dies at 77". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved January 12, 2025.
"Novel probes future computers". The Evening Sun. June 29, 1984. p. 10. Retrieved January 16, 2025.
Johnston, Kelvin (December 23, 1984). "Science fiction". The Observer. p. 28. Retrieved January 16, 2025.
"Sci-fi". The Roanoke Times. September 26, 1983. p. 5. Retrieved January 16, 2025.
"Science Fiction". Newsday. July 8, 1984. p. 150. Retrieved January 16, 2025.


### Websites
Alexander, Leigh (September 3, 2014). "Lo-Fi Let's Play: Neuromancer". Rock, Paper, Shotgun.
Anthony, James (January 11, 2008). "In cyberspace, no one can hear the Neuromancer fans scream". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Retrieved May 17, 2025.
Gibson, Wiliam (January 8, 2003). "William Gibson Blog". William Gibson Books. Archived from the original on September 26, 2007. Retrieved January 13, 2025.
Hamman, Cody (March 20, 2025). "Neuromancer: Apple TV's William Gibson adaptation adds Dane DeHaan". JoBlo. Retrieved May 17, 2025.
Kinnear, Simon (October 14, 2013). "50 Amazing Unmade Movies". GamesRadar+. Retrieved May 17, 2025.
Pleshaw, Gregory J. (1995). "Neuromancer Speaks!". Wired. ISSN 1059-1028. Retrieved May 17, 2025.
Sawyer, Robert (January 13, 2016). "Hugo / Nebula / PKDick overlap — and SF's true Triple Crown". Robert J. Sawyer. Retrieved January 14, 2025.
Grossman, Lev (2005). "All-Time 100 Novels". Time. ISSN 0040-781X. Retrieved January 16, 2025.


## Further reading
Canavan, Gerry (2013). "Superseding Cyberpunk". Science Fiction Studies. 40 (1): 169–172. doi:10.5621/sciefictstud.40.1.0169. ISSN 0091-7729. JSTOR 10.5621/sciefictstud.40.1.0169.
Hollinger, Veronica (July 1999). "Contemporary Trends in Science Fiction Criticism, 1980–1999". Science Fiction Studies. 26 (78): 232–262. doi:10.1525/sfs.26.2.0232. Retrieved November 6, 2007.
Punday, Daniel (2000). "The Narrative Construction of Cyberspace: Reading Neuromancer, Reading Cyberspace Debates". College English. 63 (2): 194–213. doi:10.2307/379040. ISSN 0010-0994. JSTOR 379040.
Youngquist, Paul (2012). "Cyberpunk, War, and Money: Neal Stephenson's Cryptonomicon". Contemporary Literature. 53 (2): 319–347. doi:10.1353/cli.2012.0011. ISSN 1548-9949.


## External links
Internet portal
Speculative fiction portal
Neuromancer title listing at the Internet Speculative Fiction Database
The deeply influential cyberpunk classic, 30 years on, The Guardian Book Club, 7 Nov 2014

v
t
e
List of works
List of awards and nominations
Neuromancer (1984)
Count Zero (1986)
Mona Lisa Overdrive (1988)
Virtual Light (1993)
Idoru (1996)
All Tomorrow's Parties (1999)
Pattern Recognition (2003)
Spook Country (2007)
Zero History (2010)
The Peripheral (2014)
Agency (2020)
The Difference Engine (with Bruce Sterling) (1990)
Archangel (2016)
"Fragments of a Hologram Rose"
"Johnny Mnemonic"
"The Gernsback Continuum"
"Hinterlands"
"New Rose Hotel"
"The Belonging Kind"
"Burning Chrome"
"Red Star, Winter Orbit"
"The Winter Market"
"Dogfight"
"Skinner's Room"
Burning Chrome collection
Agrippa (A Book of the Dead)
"Disneyland with the Death Penalty"
No Maps for These Territories
Distrust That Particular Flavor
"Kill Switch"
"First Person Shooter"
Molly Millions
Bobby Newmark
Rei Toei
Cayce Pollard
Hubertus Bigend
Cyberspace
Megacorporation
Locative art
Intrusion Countermeasures Electronics
Raygun Gothic
Neuromancer video game
Johnny Mnemonic film
New Rose Hotel film
Node Magazine
William Gibson: A Literary Companion
The Peripheral TV series
v
t
e
The Sword in the Stone by T. H. White (1939)
Slan by A. E. van Vogt (1941)
Beyond This Horizon by Anson MacDonald (1943)
Conjure Wife by Fritz Leiber (1944)
Shadow Over Mars by Leigh Brackett (1945)
The Mule by Isaac Asimov (1946)
Farmer in the Sky by Robert A. Heinlein (1951)
Fahrenheit 451 by Ray Bradbury (1954)
The Demolished Man by Alfred Bester (1953)
They'd Rather Be Right (aka: The Forever Machine) by Mark Clifton and Frank Riley (1955)
Double Star by Robert A. Heinlein (1956)
The Big Time by Fritz Leiber (1958)
A Case of Conscience by James Blish (1959)
Starship Troopers by Robert A. Heinlein (1960)
A Canticle for Leibowitz by Walter M. Miller, Jr. (1961)
Stranger in a Strange Land by Robert A. Heinlein (1962)
The Man in the High Castle by Philip K. Dick (1963)
Here Gather the Stars (aka: Way Station) by Clifford D. Simak (1964)
The Wanderer by Fritz Leiber (1965)
Dune by Frank Herbert / ...And Call Me Conrad (aka: This Immortal) by Roger Zelazny (1966)
The Moon Is a Harsh Mistress by Robert A. Heinlein (1967)
Lord of Light by Roger Zelazny (1968)
Stand on Zanzibar by John Brunner (1969)
The Left Hand of Darkness by Ursula K. Le Guin (1970)
Ringworld by Larry Niven (1971)
To Your Scattered Bodies Go by Philip José Farmer (1972)
The Gods Themselves by Isaac Asimov (1973)
Rendezvous with Rama by Arthur C. Clarke (1974)
The Dispossessed by Ursula K. Le Guin (1975)
The Forever War by Joe Haldeman (1976)
Where Late the Sweet Birds Sang by Kate Wilhelm (1977)
Gateway by Frederik Pohl (1978)
Dreamsnake by Vonda N. McIntyre (1979)
The Fountains of Paradise by Arthur C. Clarke (1980)
The Snow Queen by Joan D. Vinge (1981)
Downbelow Station by C. J. Cherryh (1982)
Foundation's Edge by Isaac Asimov (1983)
Startide Rising by David Brin (1984)
Neuromancer by William Gibson (1985)
Ender's Game by Orson Scott Card (1986)
Speaker for the Dead by Orson Scott Card (1987)
The Uplift War by David Brin (1988)
Cyteen by C. J. Cherryh (1989)
Hyperion by Dan Simmons (1990)
The Vor Game by Lois McMaster Bujold (1991)
Barrayar by Lois McMaster Bujold (1992)
A Fire Upon the Deep by Vernor Vinge / Doomsday Book by Connie Willis (1993)
Green Mars by Kim Stanley Robinson (1994)
Mirror Dance by Lois McMaster Bujold (1995)
The Diamond Age by Neal Stephenson (1996)
Blue Mars by Kim Stanley Robinson (1997)
Forever Peace by Joe Haldeman (1998)
To Say Nothing of the Dog by Connie Willis (1999)
A Deepness in the Sky by Vernor Vinge (2000)
Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire by J. K. Rowling (2001)
American Gods by Neil Gaiman (2002)
Hominids by Robert J. Sawyer (2003)
Paladin of Souls by Lois McMaster Bujold (2004)
Jonathan Strange & Mr Norrell by Susanna Clarke (2005)
Spin by Robert Charles Wilson (2006)
Rainbows End by Vernor Vinge (2007)
The Yiddish Policemen's Union by Michael Chabon (2008)
The Graveyard Book by Neil Gaiman (2009)
The Windup Girl by Paolo Bacigalupi / The City & the City by China Miéville (2010)
Blackout/All Clear by Connie Willis (2011)
Among Others by Jo Walton (2012)
Redshirts by John Scalzi (2013)
Ancillary Justice by Ann Leckie (2014)
The Three-Body Problem by Cixin Liu, translated by Ken Liu (2015)
The Fifth Season by N. K. Jemisin (2016)
The Obelisk Gate by N. K. Jemisin (2017)
The Stone Sky by N. K. Jemisin (2018)
The Calculating Stars by Mary Robinette Kowal (2019)
A Memory Called Empire by Arkady Martine (2020)
Network Effect by Martha Wells (2021)
A Desolation Called Peace by Arkady Martine (2022)
Nettle & Bone by T. Kingfisher (2023)
Some Desperate Glory by Emily Tesh (2024)
v
t
e
Dune by Frank Herbert (1966)
Babel-17 by Samuel R. Delany / Flowers for Algernon by Daniel Keyes (1967)
The Einstein Intersection by Samuel R. Delany (1968)
Rite of Passage by Alexei Panshin (1969)
The Left Hand of Darkness by Ursula K. Le Guin (1970)
Ringworld by Larry Niven (1971)
A Time of Changes by Robert Silverberg (1972)
The Gods Themselves by Isaac Asimov (1973)
Rendezvous with Rama by Arthur C. Clarke (1974)
The Dispossessed by Ursula K. Le Guin (1975)
The Forever War by Joe Haldeman (1976)
Man Plus by Frederik Pohl (1977)
Gateway by Frederik Pohl (1978)
Dreamsnake by Vonda N. McIntyre (1979)
The Fountains of Paradise by Arthur C. Clarke (1980)
Timescape by Gregory Benford (1981)
The Claw of the Conciliator by Gene Wolfe (1982)
No Enemy But Time by Michael Bishop (1983)
Startide Rising by David Brin (1984)
Neuromancer by William Gibson (1985)
Ender's Game by Orson Scott Card (1986)
Speaker for the Dead by Orson Scott Card (1987)
The Falling Woman by Pat Murphy (1988)
Falling Free by Lois McMaster Bujold (1989)
The Healer's War by Elizabeth Ann Scarborough (1990)
Tehanu: The Last Book of Earthsea by Ursula K. Le Guin (1991)
Stations of the Tide by Michael Swanwick (1992)
Doomsday Book by Connie Willis (1993)
Red Mars by Kim Stanley Robinson (1994)
Moving Mars by Greg Bear (1995)
The Terminal Experiment by Robert J. Sawyer (1996)
Slow River by Nicola Griffith (1997)
The Moon and the Sun by Vonda N. McIntyre (1998)
Forever Peace by Joe Haldeman (1999)
Parable of the Talents by Octavia E. Butler (2000)
Darwin's Radio by Greg Bear (2001)
The Quantum Rose by Catherine Asaro (2002)
American Gods by Neil Gaiman (2003)
Speed of Dark by Elizabeth Moon (2004)
Paladin of Souls by Lois McMaster Bujold (2005)
Camouflage by Joe Haldeman (2006)
Seeker by Jack McDevitt (2007)
The Yiddish Policemen's Union by Michael Chabon (2008)
Powers by Ursula K. Le Guin (2009)
The Windup Girl by Paolo Bacigalupi (2010)
Blackout/All Clear by Connie Willis (2011)
Among Others by Jo Walton (2012)
2312 by Kim Stanley Robinson (2013)
Ancillary Justice by Ann Leckie (2014)
Annihilation by Jeff VanderMeer (2015)
Uprooted by Naomi Novik (2016)
All the Birds in the Sky by Charlie Jane Anders (2017)
The Stone Sky by N. K. Jemisin (2018)
The Calculating Stars by Mary Robinette Kowal (2019)
A Song for a New Day by Sarah Pinsker (2020)
Network Effect by Martha Wells (2021)
A Master of Djinn by P. Djèlí Clark (2022)
Babel, or the Necessity of Violence by R. F. Kuang (2023)
The Saint of Bright Doors by Vajra Chandrasekera (2024)
Someone You Can Build a Nest In by John Wiswell (2025)
v
t
e
Software by Rudy Rucker (1983)
The Anubis Gates by Tim Powers (1984)
Neuromancer by William Gibson (1985)
Dinner at Deviant's Palace by Tim Powers (1986)
Homunculus by James Blaylock (1987)
Strange Toys by Patricia Geary (1988)
Four Hundred Billion Stars by Paul J. McAuley (1989) (tie)
Wetware by Rudy Rucker (1989) (tie)
Subterranean Gallery by Richard Paul Russo (1990)
Points of Departure by Pat Murphy (1991)
King of Morning, Queen of Day by Ian McDonald (1992)
Through the Heart by Richard Grant (1993)
Growing Up Weightless by John M. Ford (1994) (tie)
Elvissey by Jack Womack (1994) (tie)
Mysterium by Robert Charles Wilson (1995)
Headcrash by Bruce Bethke (1996)
The Time Ships by Stephen Baxter (1997)
The Troika by Stepan Chapman (1998)
253: The Print Remix by Geoff Ryman (1999)
Vacuum Diagrams by Stephen Baxter (2000)
Only Forward by Michael Marshall Smith (2001)
Ship of Fools by Richard Paul Russo (2002)
The Mount by Carol Emshwiller (2003)
Altered Carbon by Richard K. Morgan (2004)
Life by Gwyneth Jones (2005)
War Surf by M. M. Buckner (2006)
Spin Control by Chris Moriarty (2007)
Nova Swing by M. John Harrison (2008)
Emissaries from The Dead by Adam-Troy Castro (2009) (tie)
Terminal Mind by David Walton (2009) (tie)
Bitter Angels by C. L. Anderson (2010)
The Strange Affair of Spring-Heeled Jack by Mark Hodder (2011)
The Samuil Petrovitch Trilogy by Simon Morden (2012)
Lost Everything by Brian Francis Slattery (2013)
Countdown City by Ben H. Winters (2014)
The Book of the Unnamed Midwife by Meg Elison (2015)
Apex by Ramez Naam (2016)
The Mercy Journals by Claudia Casper (2017)
Bannerless by Carrie Vaughn (2018)
Theory of Bastards by Audrey Schulman (2019)
Sooner or Later Everything Falls into the Sea by Sarah Pinsker (2020)
Road Out of Winter by Alison Stine (2021)
Dead Space by Kali Wallace (2022)
The Extractionist by Kimberly Unger (2023)
These Burning Stars by Bethany Jacobs (2024)
Category
Spain
MusicBrainz work


